                                     
  
          
1 
  
 
   
 
NIGERIA DATA PROTECTION ACT (NDP ACT) 2023  
GENERAL APPLICATION AND IMPLEMENTATION DIRECTIVE 
(GAID) 202 5 
NDPC/NDP ACT -GAID/01/2025  
 
ARRANGEMENT OF ARTICLES  
 
AUTHO RITY  
PREA MBLE  
Article 1: The Objectives and Applicati on 
Article 2: Material Context of Data Processing and Priority of the NDP Ac t 
Article 3: Statutory Remedy in Respect of Double or Multiple Regulatory  
                Framework on Data Protectio n 
Article 4: Cooperation between the Commission and a Public Authorit y 
Article 5: Evaluation of Exemptions to the NDP Ac t 
Article 6: Data Processing by Individuals for Household or Personal Purposes  
Article 7: General NDP Act Compliance Measures by Data Controllers and Data     
Processors  
Article 8: Designation of Data Controllers and Data Processors of Major      
Importance  
Article 9: Registration as a Data Controller or Data Processor of Major Importance   
Article 10: Filing of NDP Act Compliance Audit R eturns with the Commission  
Article 11: Designation of a Data Protection Officer  
Article 12: Position of the Data Protection Officer  
Article 13: Submission of Internal Semi -Annual Data Protection Report by a Data            
Protection Officer  
                                     
  
          
2 
  
 
Article 14: Cr edential Assessment of a Data Protection Officer  
Article 15: Principles of Personal Data Protection  
Article 16: Lawful Bases of Data Processing  
Article 17: Reliance on Consent  
Article 18: Data Processing Which Requires Consent  
Article 19: Consent to Cookies and other Tracking Tools  
Article 20: Lawfulness of Purpose and Reliance on Consent and Other Lawful 
Bases  
Article 21: Reliance on Contract  
Article 2 2: Reliance on Legal Obligation  
Article 2 3: Evaluation of Lawful Bas es of Data Processing  
Article 2 4: Reliance on Vital Interest  
Article 2 5: Reliance on Public Interest  
Article 2 6: Reliance on Legitimate Interest  
Article 2 7: Consideration Regarding Information to Data Subjects  
Article 2 8: Data Privacy Impact Assessment  
Article 29: Monitoring, Evaluation and Maintenance of Data Security Syste m 
Article 3 0: Schedule for Internal Sensitisation and Training on Privacy  
Article 3 1: Deployment of a Data Processing Software by a Data Controller or 
Data Processor  
Article 3 2: Measures Against Privacy Breach Abetment  
Article 3 3: Data Breach Notification  
Article 3 4: Data Processing Agreement  
Article 3 5: Benchmarking with Interoperable Data Privacy Measures  
Article 3 6: Exercise of Right to Rectification  
Article 3 7: Exercise of Right to Data Portability  
Article 3 8: Exerc ise of Right to be Forgotte n 
Article 39: Exercise of Right to Lodge a Complaint with the Commission  
Article 4 0: Data Subject ’s Standard Notice to Address Grievance                                       
  
          
3 
  
 
Article 4 1: Data Ethics, Privacy and Dignity of the Human Person  
Article 4 2: Application of Global Best Practice on Data Ethics  
Article 4 3: Emerging Technologies  
Article 4 4: Parameters for Assessing Privacy and Public Interest in Emerging 
Technologies  
Article 4 5: Cross -Border Data Transfer  
Article 4 6: Capacity Building in Data Protection and Cont inuous Professional 
Development Credits  
Article 4 7: Jurisdiction of Court and Access to Justice  
Article 4 8: Evidence of Compliance with the NDP Act  
Article 49: Consideration of Time -Bound and Non -Time -Bound Obligations  
Article 5 0: Supplementary Regulations, Directives and Schedules  
Article 5 1: Review of Administrative and Financial Obligations under Special 
Grounds  
Article 5 2: Definitions  
 
SCHEDULES  
Schedule 1 - Principles of Data Protection  
Schedule 2 - NDP Act Compliance Audit Returns  
Schedule 3 – Data Protection Officer ’s Assessment  
Schedule 4 - Data Privacy Impact Assessment  
Schedule 5 - Guidance on Cross -border  Data Transfer  
Schedule 6 - Data Subject ’s Vulnerability Indexes  
Schedule 7 - Guidance Notice on Registration of Data Con trollers and Processors  
of Major Importance  
Schedule 8 - Legitimate Interest Assessment Template  
Schedule 9 - Data Subject ’s Standard Notice to Address Grievance  
Schedule 10 - NDP Act Compliance Audit Returns Filing Fee                                       
  
          
4 
  
 
LIST OF ABBREVIATED TERMS  
 
Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR)  
 
Annual Credential Assessment (ACA)  
 
Application Hosting Platforms (AHP)  
 
Basic Privacy Checklist (BPC)     
 
Compliance Audit Returns (CAR)  
 
Confidentiality Integrity and Availability (CIA)  
 
Data Privacy Impact Assessmen t (DPIA)  
 
Data Processing Agreement (DPA)  
 
Data Processing Service Unit (DPSU)  
 
Data Processing Software (DPS)  
 
Data Protection Officer (DPO)  
 
Emerging Technologies (ETs)  
 
Nigeria Data Protection Act -General Application and Implementation Directive  
(NDP Act-GAID)  
 
Interoperable Data Privacy Measures (IDPMs)  
 
Internet of Things (IoTs)  
 
Legitimate Interest Assessment (LIA)  
 
Major Data Processing: -  
 
- Ultra -High Level (UHL)  
 
- Extra -High Level (EHL)  
 
- Ordinary -High Level (OHL)  
 
Monitoring Evaluation and Maintenance (MEM)  
 
National Identification Number (NIN)  
 
Pre-Action Conference (PAC)  
 
Record of Processing Activities (ROPA)  
 
Semi -Annual Data Protection Report (SADPR)                                       
  
          
5 
  
 
 
Sensitisation and Training on Privacy (SToP)  
 
Special Rule o f Law Indexes (SRLI)  
 
Standard Contractual Clauses (SCC)  
 
Standard Notice to Address Grievance (SNAG)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                      
  
          
6 
  
 
AUTHORITY : - 
PURSUANT TO SECTION 37 OF THE 1999 CONSTITUTION OF THE 
FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF NIGERIA, SECTIONS 1(A), 6(C) , 61 & 62 OF THE 
NIGERIA DATA PROTECTION ACT 2023 AND ALL OTHER POWERS 
ENABLING THE COMMISSION IN THAT BEHALF.  
PREAMBLE : - 
WHEREAS, the implementation of the Nigeria Data Protection Act , 2023 (hereafter 
referred to as the NDP Act) is designed to among other th ings, safeguard the right to 
privacy in accordance with Section 37 of the 1999 Constitution of the Federal 
Republic of Nigeria (hereafter referred to as the 1999 Constitution), and to foster the 
trusted use of data in building a sustainable digital  economy ; 
ACKNOWLEDGING the importance of a General Application and 
Implementation Directive (hereafter referred to as GAID) in providing guidance, 
particularly in the space of disruptive technologies and shifting paradigms of 
engagements – involving the processing of personal information – among citizens, 
organisations, communities, states and countries around the world;  
DESIRING that in the vast pressure of changes in technological advancements, 
there should, nevertheless, be certainty in legal obligations particularly when the 
rights and freedoms of natural persons may be at risk in the absence of such 
certainties; and the need to contribute to the evolving jurisprudence of data 
protection and privacy rights in this regard – particularly the nee d to advance and 
never to abridge fundamental rights and freedoms;  
MINDFUL of the compelling need to foster a coherent, national adequacy of data 
protection – which adequacy is a condition precedent to effective data flows for 
transactions including but no t limited to those involving security, economy, 
migration, finance, international and inter -state trade;  
COGNISANT  of the function of the Nigeria Data Protection Commission (hereafter 
referred to as the Commission) under the NDP Act, particularly as Niger ia’s 
independent regulatory authority in superintending over Data Protection and Privacy 
issues, and supervising data controllers and data processors;                                       
  
          
7 
  
 
THUS, the Commission hereby issues the Nigeria Data Protection Act General 
Application and Implementation  Directive (GAID).  
Article 1: The Objectives and Application  
(1) In all processes and transactions relating to the personal data of data subjects in 
Nigeria, it is a constitutional obligation to carefully consider the material scope 
and the territorial scope of the NDP Act vis -à-vis its objectives before a decision 
affecting the fundamental right to privacy is taken.  
(2) Section 2(c) of the NDP Act applies to a data controller or data processor not 
domiciled in Nigeria but processes the personal data of a data sub ject in Nigeria 
or targets the personal data of data subjects in Nigeria. A data controller or data 
processor shall be cognisant of how domiciliation applies in Section 2 of the NDP 
Act. Sub -Articles 3 and 4 of this Article shall be relied upon for guidanc e when 
the right of a data subject and question of domiciliation of the data controller or 
data processor arises.  
(3) In line with the principle of universality of civil liberties, a natural person is 
entitled to the protection of his or her fundamental rights  anywhere in the world. 
Accordingly, the categories of data subjects listed in Sub -Article 4 shall be entitled 
to the enjoyment of data subject rights under the NDP Act - subject only to the 
derogations permitted under the 1999 Constitution and any preempt ory norm or 
international treaty applicable to Nigeria under International Law.   
(4) The categories of data subjects to whom Sub -Article 3 relates are:  
(a) A data subject who is within the territory of Nigeria – regardless of nationality 
and migration status;  
(b) A data subject whose personal data has been transferred to Nigeria;  
(c) A data subject whose personal data is in transit through Nigeria – without 
more – provided that the obligation of the data controller or data processor 
responsible for the transmission thro ugh Nigeria to another jurisdiction shall 
be limited to data confidentiality, integrity and availability;  
(d) A Nigerian citizen who is not within Nigeria – taking into account the 
universal right to privacy under the United Nations Universal Declaration of 
Human Rights, 1948, as well as the International Covenant on Civil and 
Political Rights, 1976, provided that:                                       
  
          
8 
  
 
i. In this circumstance, the Commission may seek mutual legal assistance 
from the relevant authorities  in the country where such citizen is resident 
in order to safeguard his or her privacy right as may be recognised under 
International Law; and  
ii. The obligation of the data controller or data processor in this 
circumstance of Article 1(4)(d) shall be limited to the terms of mutual 
legal assistance and any  applicable International Law.  
Article 2: Material Context of Data Processing and Priority of the NDP Act  
(a) Every person, body or authority owes a duty of care to data subjects, to carefully 
examine the material context of personal data processing with a vie w to ascertaining 
whether the processing required in the said context is consistent with the 
constitutional right to privacy and the objectives set forth in section 1 of the NDP 
Act. 
(b) The material context referred to in Sub -Article 2(a) which are essentiall y under the 
Exclusive Legislative List, 2nd Schedule to the 1999 Constitution  and mandates of 
Federal Executive Bodies  may include any of the following items:  
 
(1) Information and data on population for the purpose of facilitating economic and 
development planning,  
(2) Immigration into and emigration from Nigeria,  
(3) Implementation of treaties,  
(4) Fingerprints identification and criminal records,  
(5) Aviation, including airports, safety of aircraft and carriage of passengers and 
goods by air,  
(6) Bankruptcy and insolvency,  
(7) Banking, bills of exchange and promissory notes,  
(8) Borrowing of moneys within or outside Nigeria for the purposes of the 
Federation or of any State,  
(9) Census, including the establishment and maintenance of machinery for 
continuous and universal registration of  births and deaths throughout Nigeria,  
(10) Citizenship, naturalisation and aliens,   
(11) Control of capital issues,  
(12) Copyright,                                       
  
          
9 
  
 
(13) Creation of States,  
(14) Currency, coinage and legal tender,  
(15) Customs and excise duties,  
(16) Defence,  
(17) Deportation of persons who are not citizens o f Nigeria,  
(18) Designation of securities in which trust funds may be invested,  
(19) Election to the offices of President and Vice -President or Governor and 
Deputy Governor and any other office to which a person may be elected,  
(20) Education,  
(21) Evidence,  
(22) Exchange control,  
(23) Export duties,  
(24) External affairs,  
(25) Extradition,  
(26) Health,  
(27) Incorporation, regulation and winding up of bodies corporate,  
(28) Insurance,  
(29) Labour, including trade unions, industrial relations, conditions,  
(30) Safety and welfare of labour, industrial disputes,  
(31) Legal proceedings between Governments of States or between the 
Government of the Federation and Government of any State or any other 
authority or person,  
(32) Maritime,  
(33) Taxation,  
(34) Trade and commerce, and in particular trade and commerce between Nigeria 
and other count ries including import of commodities into and export of 
commodities from Nigeria, trade and commerce between the States,  
(35) Weights and measures,  
(36) Wireless, broadcasting and television other than broadcasting and television 
provided by the Government of a Stat e, allocation of wave -lengths for wireless, 
broadcasting and television transmission, and  
(37) The establishment and regulation of authorities for the Federation or any part 
thereof to promote and enforce the observance of the Fundamental Objectives                                      
  
          
10 
  
 
and Directi ve Principles of State Policy under the 1999 Constitution of the 
Federal Republic of Nigeria.  
(c) The implication of the itemisation in Sub -Article 2(b) above is that personal data is 
fundamental to the performance of transnational and inherent functions of th e 
Federal Government of Nigeria as well as to trade and commerce – by persons or 
entities – which transcend subnational levels; the Act, therefore, applies as a 
common statutory authority for the protection of privacy of data subjects in the 
Federal Republ ic of Nigeria; and  
(d) Data controllers and data processors shall take into consideration the material 
character of data – particularly its value, volume, variety, velocity and veracity – as 
it flows within and beyond the Nigerian territory and put in place ap propriate 
technical and organisational measures to mitigate associated risks.  
Article 3: Statutory Remedy in Respect of Double or Multiple Regulatory 
Framework on Data Protection  
(1) In order to guarantee certainty, harmony and efficacy on the regulation of:  
a) Informational self -determination (fundamental right to privacy);  
b) Data sovereignty (the inherent right of an independent country to govern data 
processing pertaining to persons in her territory);  
c) National and cross -border data flows; and  
d) Treaty obligations  (particularly in the material context highlighted in Article 2(b) 
of this GAID),  
it is imperative to uphold the provision of section 63 of the NDP Act in all 
proceedings and transactions pertaining to the processing of personal data. For ease 
of reference  Section 63 of the NDP Act provides: “Where the provisions of any other 
law or enactment, in so far as they provide or relate directly or indirectly to the 
processing of personal data, are inconsistent with any of the provisions of this Act, 
the provisions  of this Act shall prevail. ” 
(2)  In the event of a conflict between the NDP Act and this GAID, the NDP Act shall 
prevail.  
(3)  Upon the issuance of the GAID, the Commission shall cease to apply the Nigeria 
Data Protection Regulation (NDPR) 2019 as a legal instrum ent for regulating data 
privacy and protection.  In line with Section 64 of the NDP Act relating to transitional                                      
  
          
11 
  
 
provisions, this measure shall not affect anything done under the NDPR prior to the 
issuance of  this GAID.  
Article 4: Cooperation between the Commission and a Public Authority  
(1) Section 5(h) of the NDP Act mandates the Commission to collaborate with public 
authorities among others in order to achieve the objectives set forth in the NDP Act.  
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of Section 63 of the  NDP Act, the Commission 
shall cooperate with relevant public authorities in the development of sub -national or 
sectoral guidelines on data protection.  
(3) The Commission shall conduct periodic reviews of sub -national or sectoral 
guidelines to determine whethe r such guidelines or instruments comply with the NDP 
Act, taking into account the provisions of Articles 1 & 2, of this GAID.  
(4) Where the Commission determines that a guideline by a public authority relating to 
the processing of personal data negates the obj ectives of the NDP Act, it shall 
communicate its decisions to the public authority and it may in addition, request joint 
reviews with a view to developing a harmonious sub -national or sectoral guideline.  
(5) The Commission shall take proactive steps in collabo rating with public authorities 
and relevant institutions for the purposes of setting up Data Privacy Service Units, 
Legal Clinics for Data Privacy, Centres of Excellence or similar forums at sub -
national, sectoral and organisational levels.  
(6) In line with se ction 33 of the NDP Act, the Commission may engage a person who 
may be referred to as a Fellow, Associate, Trainee, Champion or a Data Protection 
Compliance Organisation to participate in a Forum referred to in Sub -Article 5 of this 
Article.  
Article 5: Ev aluation of Exemptions to the NDP Act  
(1) A data controller, a data processor or an individual who relies on or intends to rely 
on any exemption pursuant to Section 3 of the NDP Act, shall abide by other 
provisions which are not exempted by the NDP Act.  
(2) A dat a processing activity which falls within the exemptions under Section 3 of the 
NDP Act is at the minimum, bound by the following provisions of the NDP Act :  
a) S. 24 – Principles of personal data processing  
b) S. 25 – Lawful basis of personal data processing                                       
  
          
12 
  
 
c) S. 32 - Designation of Data Protection Officers  
d) S. 40 – Personal data breaches notification  
e) Part VI - Data subjects ’ rights  
(3) Exemptions under the NDP Act apply to the obligations under Chapter V of the NDP 
Act apart from the sections mentioned in Sub -Article 2 of this Article. Thus, the 
Commission shall hold a data controller or data processor accountable for the 
infraction of a ny other provision of the NDP Act not covered by the exemption.  
(4) In exercise of its power under the NDP Act, and in carrying out an assessment of 
data processing activities exempted under Section 3 of the NDP Act, the Commission 
shall take into consideration:  
a) The degree of derogation permitted under the 1999 Constitution;  
b) The lawful basis relied upon by the data controllers or data processors involved;  
c) The impact on data subjects;  
d) The degree of compliance with the principles of data protection;  
e) Proportionality and necessity of the data processing in relation to the impact on 
privacy of the affected data subject.   
f) The opportunity given to a data subject to lodge a complaint with the 
Commission.  
Article 6: Data Processing by Individuals for Househ old or Personal Purposes  
(1) In line with the provision of Section 3(1) of the NDP Act, an individual who 
processes data solely for personal or household purposes shall respect the privacy of 
a data subject and shall be held accountable for the conduct which p uts the privacy 
of a data subject at risk.  
(2) The conduct referred to in Sub -Article 1 of this Article which may put another person 
at risk includes the following:  
a) Permission granted to data controllers or data processors to access contacts on 
phones throug h the use of software or digital applications;  
b) Sharing or transferring personal data to any person or platform for any reason;  
c) Lack of duty of care in handling any device which stores personal data;  
d) Verbal or written disclosure of personal data; and  
e) Unau thorised access to personal data of any person.                                       
  
          
13 
  
 
Article 7: General NDP Act Compliance Measures by Data Controllers and 
Data Processors  
In order to comply with the provisions of the NDP Act, a data controller or data 
processor is, among others, expected to:  
a) Register with the Commission as a data controller or data processor of major 
importance  as the Commission may determine in accordance  with the NDP Act.   
b) Conduct a NDP Act compliance audit within Fifteen (15) months of 
commencement of business and thereafter on an annual basis;  
c) In the case of data controllers and data processors of major importance (Ultra 
High Level and Extra -High Leve l as defined in Article 8 of this NDP Act -
GAID), file NDP Act Compliance Audit Returns (CAR) with the Commission 
not later than the 31st of March of each year;  
d) Identify all its obligations under the NDP Act and prepare schedules of 
compliance;  
e) Prepare and  keep semi -annual data protection reports which shall be a detailed 
analysis of data processing within six (6) months;  
f) Prepare and follow Schedules on Monitoring Evaluation and Maintenance of 
Data Security System in order to guarantee data confidentiality,  integrity and 
availability;  
g) Prepare and follow schedules on organisation -wide, internal sensitisation and 
training  on data privacy and protection in order to foster a culture of compliance 
with the NDP Act and best practices ; 
h) Identify all obligations rela ting to data controllers or data processors under the 
NDP Act and prepare schedules of compliance;  
i) In the case of a data controller or data processor of major importance, designate 
a Data Protection Officer (DPO). Associate DPOs/Privacy Champions may be 
designated to support the DPO where the data controller or the data processor 
carries out data processing or interfaces with data subjects on multiple platforms 
and places;  
j) Develop or review its organisational privacy policies, the privacy policy shall 
be in  compliance with the NDP Act;  
k) Publish its organisational privacy policies on its platforms with a view to 
sensitising data subjects on data processing activities as well as rights and duties 
in connection therewith;                                       
  
          
14 
  
 
l) Provide privacy and cookie notices at t he homepage of its website. The cookie 
notice should give a data subject the opportunity to decline or accept the notice; 
A cookie notice must be displayed in such a way that it significantly obstructs 
the middle, the left or the right side of the home pag e of a website. Displaying 
a cookie notice at the bottom of a webpage where it may be ignored or be 
unnoticed by a data subject is tantamount to lack of transparency in data 
processing.  
m) Ensure that the privacy policy and notice is transparent and appropria tely 
provided on platforms/places where data processing is taking place; and without 
prejudice to the NDP Act, it shall also take into account specific directions on 
privacy by relevant Application Hosting Platforms through which a data subject 
may access its services;  
n) Develop and circulate an internal data protection strategy or policy and basic 
privacy checklist to help members of staff and other relevant persons (such as 
vendors, agents and contractors) understand the organisation ’s direction in 
connect ion with the processing of personal data and outline the steps they are 
to take to ensure the organisation ’s direction is maintained;  
o) Conduct a Data Privacy Impact Assessment (DPIA) when required under the 
NDP Act, or when directed by the Commission;  
p) Notif y the Commission of personal data breaches within seventy -two (72) hours 
of becoming aware of the breach;  
q) Notify a data subject immediately after becoming aware of a personal data 
breach that may pose high risk to his or her privacy;  
r) Update agreements wi th third party processors to ensure compliance with the 
NDP Act;  
s) Design systems and processes to make data requests and access seamless for 
data subjects;  
t) Design systems and processes to enable data subjects to easily correct or update 
their personal data;  
u) Design systems and processes to enable data subjects easily transfer data to 
another platform or person (natural or artificial);  
v) At least within the six (6) months of commencement of business and then, at 
the minimum, on an annual basis, train its personn el on data protection law and 
practices ; and                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
  
          
15 
  
 
w) Clearly explain the complaints process to data subjects including the right to 
lodge a complain t with the Commission.  
Article 8: Designation of Data Controllers and Data Processors of Major 
Importance  
(1) Section 65 of the NDP Act  provides , “data controller or data processor of major 
importance ” means a data controller or data processor that is domiciled, resident in, 
or operating in Nigeria and processes or intends to process personal data of more 
than such number of data subjects who are within Nigeria, as the Commission may 
prescribe, or such other class of data controller or data processor th at is processing 
personal data of particular value or significance to the economy, society or security 
of Nigeria as the Commission may designate . 
(2) “Operating in Nigeria ” as stated in section 65 includes a data controller or a data 
processor who targets a d ata subject in Nigeria . Such data controller or processor 
may not be domiciled in or resident in Nigeria. This  is taking into consideration the 
provision of section 2(2)(a) of the NDP Act  on the Application of the Act as well as 
sections 24(3) and 44 on th e need to hold accountable data controllers and processors 
whose processing activities significantly impact  the economy, society or security of 
Nigeria.  
(3) In carrying out an objective assessment of  what is of value or significance to the 
economy, society or security of Nigeria, the Commission shall take into 
consideration all relevant factors – including but not limited to the following:  
a) The risks that the data processing by a data controller or a data processor poses 
to a data subject if such data controller  or data processor is not under the 
obligation imposed by the NDP Act on a data controller or a data processor of 
major importance as contemplated by section 29(1)(a) of the NDP Act;  
b) The implication for data sovereignty where data controllers or data proce ssors 
may advertently or inadvertently transfer data outside Nigeria ’s jurisdiction 
to the detriment of the economy, society or security of Nigeria;  
c) The sensitivity of the personal data involved;  
d) Data driven financial assets entrusted by data subjects in t he care of the data 
controller or data processor;  
e) Reliance on third party servers or cloud computing services for the purpose of 
substantial processing of personal data;                                       
  
          
16 
  
 
f) Substantial involvement in cross -border data flows;  
g) Use of filing systems and automa tion of data processing;  
h) Number of data subjects involved;  and 
i) The need for international standard certifications for people, processes and 
technologies involved in data confidentiality, integrity and availability.  
(4) In order to ensure proportionality of ob ligations in relation to various levels of 
major data processing, the Commission classifies data controllers and data 
processors into 3 (three) levels or categories of major data processing, namely:  
(a) Ultra -High Level (UHL)  
(b) Extra -High Level (EHL)  
(c) Ordinary -High Level (OHL)  
(5) For direction on the  classes of UHL, EHL and OHL and fees payable, the 
Guidance Notice issued by the Commission and reproduced in this GAID as 
Schedule 7, shall be relied upon until such a time that the Commission amends or 
replaces the sai d Guidance Notice.  
Article 9: Registration as a Data Controller or Data Processor of Major   
        Importance  
(1) A data controller or a data processor of major importance as designated by the 
Commission shall register with the Commission in accordance with the Guidance 
Notice issued by the Commission and reproduced in this GAID as Schedule 7.  
(2)  A data controller or a data processor in the category of UHL or EHL shall register 
once and shall only be required to file CAR annually.  
(3) A data controller or a data processor in the category of OHL shall renew its 
registration with the Commission on an annual basis and it shall not be required to 
file annual CAR when it renews its registration annually.  
(4) A data controller or data processor of major importance shall notify the Commission 
of any significant change to the information submitted in its most recent registration 
submission within sixty (60) days after such change by providing any information 
required by the Commission through any e lectronic submission system provided by 
the Commission, or in the absence of which by email to an address provided by the 
Commission for such purpose.  
(5) If a data controller or data processor no longer qualifies as a data controller or data 
processor of majo r importance, they may request removal from the register by                                      
  
          
17 
  
 
providing the information required by the Commission through any electronic 
submission system provided by the Commission, or in the absence of which by email 
to an address that the Commission shal l publish on its website.  
(6) Notwithstanding its removal from the register, a former data controller or data 
processor of major importance shall remain responsible for payment of any 
outstanding fees from the then -current and any prior annual registration per iods.  
(7) The Commission shall publish on its website the register of data controllers and data 
processors of major importance that have duly registered with it and shall update the 
register at least once annually.  
Article 10: Filing of NDP Act Compliance Audit Returns with the Commission  
(1) A data controller or a data processor shall carry out periodic compliance audit of its 
data processing activities with a view to mitigating the risk of data breaches through 
appropriate technical and organisational measure s.   
(2) In order to carry out an audit, a data controller or a data processor shall adopt a risk -
based approach as may be associated with people, processes and technologies 
involved in its data processing value chain.  
(3) A data controller or a data processor sh all develop or adopt privacy audit controls in 
line with global best practices. Each model of audit may comprise of a series of 
techniques ranging from simple to complex and technical to organisational.  
(4)  A data controller or data processor shall identify each point of risk and determine the 
techniques and frequency of audit to be carried out on each point of risk subject to any 
directive by the Commission.  
(5) Where personal data may be accessed from an online device of a data controller or data 
processor, suc h personal data is vulnerable to data security breach by means of cyber 
technology. The audit of such online device shall be as frequently as possible.  
(6) A data controller or data processor of major importance shall file CAR on an annual 
basis. The CAR shal l be based on the template provided in Schedule 2 to this GAID or 
as may be prescribed by the Commission.,  
(7) In the case of a data controller or a data processor of major importance that was 
established before the 12th day of June, 2023, it shall file its CA R not later than 31st of 
March each year.                                       
  
          
18 
  
 
(8) In the case of a data controller or data processor of major importance established after 
the 12th day of June 2023, it shall file CAR not later than fifteen (15) months after its 
establishment and shall subsequent ly file its CAR annually.  
(9) Where a data controller or data processor fails to file its CAR as and when due, it shall 
pay, in addition to the stipulated filing fee, an administrative penalty, which shall be 
50% of the stipulated CAR filing fee.  
(10) Except as oth erwise determined by the Commission, CAR filing fees for UHL  and EHL 
shall  be as provided for in Schedule 10  of GAID .  
(11) Where a CAR has been filed, the Commission may where necessary, direct that 
additional information be provided by a data controller or a data processor of major 
importance or by any person connected to the data processing under audit.  
(12) The annual filing of CAR as prescribed in Sub -Article 8 of this Article shall be carried 
out through an automated platform or portal provided by the Commissio n. 
(13) The Commission may issue a Compliance Audit Returns Certificate to a data controller 
or a data processor upon filing CAR.  
(14) Except as otherwise approved by the Commission, a data controller or a data processor 
within the categories of UHL and EHL shall fi le CAR through a Data Protection 
Compliance Organisation (DPCO) licensed by the Commission in line with Section 33 
of the NDP Act.  
Article 11: Designation of a Data Protection Officer  
(1) Section 32 of the NDP Act mandates the designation of a DPO, accordingly, the DPO 
may be a member of staff of the data controller or data processor, or fulfil the tasks 
on the basis of a service contract.  
(2) The data controller or the data processor shall publish the contact details of the DPO 
and communicate the same to the Commission in the prescribed form.  
Article 12: Position of the Data Protection Officer  
(1) A data controller or a data processor shall actively engage its DPO in all issues which 
relate to the processing of personal data . 
(2) The data controller or data pro cessor shall give appropriate support to the DPO in 
performing the data protection responsibilities as prescribed by the NDP Act or by                                      
  
          
19 
  
 
the Commission. Accordingly, the data controller or data processor shall put in place 
the necessary organisational measur es, namely:  
a) Provide necessary resources to the DPO to carry out data protection tasks;  
b) Ensure access to personal data processing activities and processing operations; 
and  
c) Make adequate provision for continuous training for the DPO.  
(3) The data controller or data processor shall ensure that the DPO does not carry out 
his or her task under duress, coercion, covert or overt influence.  
(4) He or she shall not be dismissed or penalised by the data controller or the data 
processor for performing  his or her tasks.  
(5) The DPO shall directly report to the management level of the controller or the 
processor.  
(6) Data subjects may contact the DPO with regard to all issues relating to the processing 
of their personal data and to the exercise of their rights under the NDP Act.  
(7) The DPO shall be bound by secrecy or confidentiality concerning the performance 
of his or her tasks, in accordance with relevant legislation.  
(8) The DPO may fulfil other tasks and duties. The data controller or data processor 
shall ensure t hat any such tasks and duties do not result in a conflict of interest.  
Article 13: Submission of Internal Semi -Annual Data Protection Report by a       
Data Protection Officer  
(1) A data controller or a data processor shall ensure that a semi -annual data prot ection 
report is compiled by its DPO and submitted to its management.  
(2) The report shall be submitted to an officer of the data controller or data processor 
who is authorised to receive a Record of Processing Activities (RoPA).  
(3) The report shall be acknowledged by the receiving officer and shall form part of the 
ROPA by the data controller or data processor.  
(4) The report shall be verified by a DPCO during the NDP Act compliance audit.   
(5) The report to be submitted by the DPO shall a mong others, contain the compliance 
status of the data controller or data processor under the NDP Act – particularly taking 
into account:  
(a) Assessment of privacy notices – taking the requirements of the NDP Act into 
account.  
(b) Types of data being processed by  the data controller or data processor .                                      
  
          
20 
  
 
(c) Principles of data protection as applicable to the processing activities of the 
data controller or data processor.  
(d) Lawful bases of data processing as applicable to the processing activities of 
the data controller or data processor.  
(e) The need for DPIA  where it  is applicable to the processing activities of the data 
controller or data processor.  
(f) Legitimate Interest Assessment (LIA) as applicable to the processing activities 
of the data controller or data processor.  
(g) Ease of data subjects in exercising their rights.  
(h) Data subjects ’ complaints and remediation (if any).  
(i) Notices issued by the Commission (if any).  
(j) Guidance sought from the DPCO, if any.  
(k) Assessment of data security.  
(l) Legal grounds for cross -border data transfer.  
(m) Breach notification to the Commission and to data subjects.  
Article 14: Credential Assessment of a Data Protection Officer  
(1) The Commission shall create a database of Certified DPOs who are designated by 
data controllers and data processors in furtherance o f Section 32 of the NDP Act.  
(2) The Commission shall carry out Annual Credential Assessment (ACA) of DPOs in 
order to ensure that each DPO maintains the level of professionalism required to carry 
out his or her responsibilities towards safeguarding the rights  and interests of data 
subjects as required under the NDP Act, relevant case laws and any regulatory 
instrument issued by the Commission.   
(3) The assessment of a DPO shall be based on the metrics provided  in Schedule 3 of this 
GAID.  
(4) A DPO shall be guided by the provisions of the NDP Act, this GAID, the Code of 
Conduct for Data Protection Compliance Organisations (DPCOs) and any other 
relevant instrument issued by the Commission.  Similarly, directives, codes or 
guidance relating to professionalism and ethics issued by any professional body to 
which a DPO belongs shall also be taken into account.  
(5) The certification of a DPO shall be verified by the Commission as part of the CAR 
or registration prescribed by the NDP Act.                                       
  
          
21 
  
 
(6)  The Commission may award verification s cores or decline verification where the 
evidence submitted by a DPO as proof of Continuous Professional Development is 
unverifiable or wholly lacks credibility . 
(7) The DPO credential assessment may be verified by the Commission upon the 
payment of the appropriate fees.  
(8) The verification of certification under Sub -Article 5 of this Article shall be a medium 
through which the Commission may determine if the person designated as a DPO is 
a fit and proper person to carry out the duties contemplated by sectio n 32 of the NDP 
Act and in particular his or her proficiency in safeguarding the rights of data subjects 
at organi sational level.  
Article 15: Principles of Personal Data Protection  
(1) The entire principles of data protection are obligatory in any form of data processing. 
The principles under section 24 of the NDP Act are:  
a) Fairness, lawfulness and transparency of data processing,  
b) Purpose limitation,  
c) Data minimisation and ethics,  
d) Storage  limitation,  
e) Data accuracy,  
f) Data confidentiality, integrity and availability,  
g) Accountability, and  
h) Duty of care.  
(2) The scope of the foregoing principles is more particularly described in Schedule 1 
of this GAID.  
Article 16: Lawful Bases of Data Processing  
(1) In line with Section 25 of the NDP Act, it is important for a data controller to carefully 
assess the lawful bas es of data processing before embarking on same.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of the NDP Act and any regulatory instruments issued by 
the Commission,  a data controller shall carefully consider and choose the appropriate 
lawful bases of data processing in order to process personal data. The lawful bases 
are: 
a) Consent                                       
  
          
22 
  
 
b) Contractual Obligation  
c) Legal Obligation  
d) Vital Interest  
e) Public Interest  
f) Legitimate Interest.  
(3) As the party who determines the purpose of data processing, the data controller is 
ultimately responsible for determining the lawful bases of data processing.  
Article 17: Reliance on Consent  
(1) Considering that data privacy is a fundamental right to  informational self -
determination, it is prudent for a data controller to prioritise the interest of the data 
subject which may be effectively addressed through his or her informed consent.  
(2) Where reliance on consent may effectively defeat the rule of law, another lawful basis 
may be considered.  
(3) In any complaint to the Commission as to whether consent was not obtained before 
data processing, and the Commission is to make a determination whether reliance on 
consent would effectively defeat the rule of law, th e Commission shall take into 
account:  
a) The clear and present risk to fundamental rights and freedoms of the data 
subject and third parties;  
b) The security implication;  
c) Public welfare;  
d) The need for efficacy in the administration of justice  - taking into account the 
need to ; 
i. Uphold equality before the law,  
ii. Submit to the neutrality and impartiality of courts of competent 
jurisdiction;  
e) Sustainable development;  
f) Prior relationship between the data controller and the data subject; and  
g) Proporti onality and necessity of the scope of the processing.  
(4) The items listed in sub (3) above are hereafter referred to collectively as Special Rule 
of Law Indexes (SRLI).  
(5) Reliance on any lawful bas es of data processing  which is not consent and not 
supported by  any SRLI shall be strictly scrutinised during NDP Act compliance                                      
  
          
23 
  
 
audits and in any proceeding where the conduct of a data controller or processor is 
called into question.  
(6) Whenever a data controller relies on consent, it shall keep a proper record that 
guarantees accountability in respect of the consent.  
(7) In determining whether a data controller is accountable in the mode of obtaining 
consent, the data controller shall:  
a) Provide appropriate information to the data subject such that the data subject, 
on the b asis of the information, may make an informed decision;  
b) Make the process of withdrawal of consent as easy as giving consent; and  
c) Ensure that refusal of consent is not detrimental to the rights and interests of the 
data subject.  
(8) Nothing in this GAID shall p revent a data subject from giving a constructive or an 
implied consent to data processing in the following circumstances:  
a) A data subject ’s acts of participation in a public event and the images taken in 
that event may be used for a report of that event – provided that such images 
shall not be used for profit or commerce -oriented advertisement without the 
express consent of the data subject. A data controller in this circumstance shall 
ensure that images captured do not portray data subjects in a bad light. In 
addition to other measures of duty of care, a data controller may put 
participants on notice that images captured may be used for reporting, 
journalistic or other purposes permitted by the NDP Act.  
b) Subject to the NDP Act and Article 18 of this GAID, a data subject ’s act of 
closing a privacy notice displayed on the centre of a webpage and which notice 
significantly obstructs the viewing of the webpage – provided that the data 
collected in such circumstances is limited to processing of personal data which 
is necessary to basic functionality of the website.  Basic functionality means 
such functions that permit the website to respond to and analyse the 
interactions of the data subject with the website.  
(9) At all times where consent is required, a data subject sh all be provided with a clear 
and explicit option to accept or to decline.                                       
  
          
24 
  
 
Article 18: Data Processing Which Requires Consent  
(1) Without prejudice to the provisions of the NDP Act and in addition to other 
circumstances in which consent may be required under this GAID or by operation 
of law, consent is required:  
a) For any direct marketing activity;  
b) For the processing of sensitive personal data;  
c) For further processing that is incompatible with the original purpose of 
processing;  
d) For the processing of the persona l data of a child;  
e) Before personal data may be transferred to a country in respect of which the 
Commission has not made an adequacy decision; and  
f) Before the data controller makes a decision based solely on automated 
processing which produces legal effects  concerning or significantly affecting 
the data subject.  
(2) A CAR shall state whether or not the data controller or the data processor relies on 
consent to carry out data processing in any of the activities itemised in Sub -Article 
1 of this Article.  
Article 19: Consent to Cookies and other Tracking Tools  
(1) Operation of cookies and other tracking tools shall comply with the principles of 
data protection under section 24 of the NDP Act.  
(2) Except as otherwise provided by thi s GAID, the use of cookies on a website or other 
digital platforms requires consent.  
(3) The consent shall be freely given, informed and specific.  
(4) A Data Controller /Data Processor  should display a cookie banner in a manner that is 
conspicuous and obvious to a user or site visitor.   
(5) Necessary cookies which do not process sensitive data, financial data or any data 
stored privately by a data subject does not need the ticking of a box or similar 
methods;  
(6) In this article “necessary cookies ” means cookies that enab le core functionality such 
as security, network stability management, and accessibility. All other forms of 
cookies require a specific selection of “yes or no ” (alternatively: “accept ” or 
“reject ”) options presented to the data subject.                                       
  
          
25 
  
 
(7) In deploying cookie s, website owners are required to:  
a) Make cookies notice banner or display conspicuous. Accordingly, a data subject 
shall not be required to scroll to any part of a website before seeing the cookie 
banner. Similarly, every tracking tool shall be made known t o the data subject at 
the section of the web page which appears first;  
b) Make cookie information clear and easy to understand;  
c) Notify users of the presence and purpose of the cookies;  
d) Identify the organisation responsible for the use of the cookies; and  
e) Prov ide information on how to withdraw consent from the use of the cookies.  
(8) The Commission shall treat any personal data tracking tool which performs 
functions that are similar to cookies as bound by the rules that apply to the use of 
cookies – taking into acc ount the legal ground that where the same facts exist the 
same rules shall apply.  
Article 20: Lawfulness of Purpose, Reliance on Consent, and Other Lawful 
Bases  
(1) In addition to other obligations under the NDP Act and this GAID, every data 
processing shall o nly proceed from purposes that are:  
i. Lawful under the NDP Act,  
ii. Not in violation of other legislation for the time being in force in Nigeria, and  
iii. Not in violation of preemptory norms of general International Law.  
(2) No consent shall be sought, given or accepted in any circumstance that may engender 
direct or indirect propagation of atrocities, hate, child rights violations and criminal 
acts. 
Article 21: Reliance on Contract  
(1) At the preliminary stage of a contract with a data subject, a data controller or data 
processor may carry out data processing on the data subject for the purpose of due 
diligence.  
(2) Where the contract did not materialise, any personal data collected relating to the 
data subject shall be destroyed within six (6) months unless there is a justifiable 
ground to archive the data for the purposes of any future legal claim.  
(3) A contract with a data subject involving data processing shall make provision for 
termination of the contract prior to the tenure of the contract.                                       
  
          
26 
  
 
(4) Pursuant to Section 46 of the 1999 Constitution and Section 34(1)(a)(vi) of the NDP 
Act, a specific term of a contract on personal data processing that ousts or purports 
to oust the adjudicatory jurisdiction of Nigerian courts or the executive jurisdiction 
of the Commission shall b e treated as void.  
(5) Without prejudice to Sub -Article 4 of this Article, and the inherent powers of a court  
of competent jurisdiction, a contract on personal data processing between a data 
controller or a data processor and a data subject may make provision  for Alternative 
Dispute Resolution (ADR) mechanisms .  
Article 2 2: Reliance on Legal Obligation  
(1) A legal obligation means any one of the following:  
a) a specific duty imposed by law;  
b) an order of a court of competent jurisdiction; or  
c) a responsibility incident al to an obligation imposed by law to carry out an act 
which requires the processing of personal data.  
(2) Where a legal obligation derogates from the general safeguards of the NDP Act, it 
shall be treated as a derogation from the right to privacy as enshrined  under Section 
37 of the 1999 Constitution, and accordingly, Section 45 of the 1999 Constitution 
applies.  
(3) In line with Section 45 of the 1999 Constitution, data processing shall only take place 
in such circumstances of derogation as stipulated in Sub -Article (2) of this Article if 
the enabling law for the said legal obligation is reasonably justifiable in a democratic 
society and:  
i. it is in the interest of defence, public safety, public order, public morality or 
public health; or  
ii. for the purpose of protect ing the rights and freedom of other persons; 
accordingly, account shall be taken of practices in a democratic society where 
the rule of law is firmly entrenched.  
(4) Data processing under legal obligation shall be strictly limited to the minimum 
requirement under a law in line with Sub -Article (3) above and shall not be used for 
a voyage of discovery into the privacy of a data subject or in circumstances of 
establishing a speculative claim.                                       
  
          
27 
  
 
(5) In any circumstance where a legal obligation for data processing is t o be imposed on 
a data controller or data processor, account shall be taken of any less intrusive 
method of processing proposed by anyone of the following persons:  
a) The affected data subject;  
b) The Commission;  
c) The concerned data controller or data processor;  
d) A non -governmental organisation in the field of human rights advocacy; and  
e) The media.  
(6) Without prejudice to the NDP Act, a data controller or data processor who is in 
possession of the personal data of a da ta subject may rely on the written opinion of 
its DPO in order to satisfy itself with:  
a) The legal competence of the authority demanding the processing of personal 
data under a legal obligation;  
b) The measures provided for the protection of personal data in ac cordance with 
the principles of data protection set forth in Section 24 of the NDP Act;  
c) The scope of the processing as contained in a competent order, warrant or 
administrative directive;  
d) Access of the data subject to applicable data subjects ’ rights in a ccordance with 
Part VI of the NDP Act; and  
e) The enforceability of data subjects ’ right against unfair data processing – taking 
into account the principles of necessity and proportionality.  
(7) Whenever a data controller or a data processor is dissatisfied  with an administrative 
order, warrant or directive regarding the processing of personal data, he or she may 
seek guidance from the Commission in line with Section 3(4) of the NDP Act and 
shall take the safeguards mandated under this Article into account.  
(8) Whene ver a data controller or a data processor or the affected data subject is 
dissatisfied  with a judicial order regarding the processing of personal data, he or she 
may approach a court of competent jurisdiction to seek a variation or the setting aside 
of the  order in accordance with binding judicial precedents.  
Article 2 3: Evaluation of Lawful Bases of Data Processing  
(1) In all adjudicatory or administrative proceedings pertaining to personal data 
processing, it shall be essential to the character of a democrat ic society to 
meticulously evaluate:                                       
  
          
28 
  
 
(a) The necessity of processing of personal data – taking into consideration the 
risks and the alternatives forgone;  
(b) The duty of care and the standard of care employed to mitigate unnecessary, 
disproportionate risks of data processing;   
(c) The functional opportunity of redress accessible to an aggrieved person in 
accordance with Part 10 of the NDP Act and the Fundamental R ights 
Enforcement Procedure Rules for the time being in force;  
(d) The proportionality of the processing of personal data – taking into account:  
i. the scope of measures adopted or intended to be adopted for the 
processing of personal data in relation to the  
ii. the legitimate aim pursued. Duty of care shall be exercised in favour of 
the data subject and or other data subjects whose fundamental rights  and 
freedoms that may be affected. It is obligatory to avoid the setting of 
precedents which are prejudicial to fundam ental rights and freedoms. It 
is prudent and obligatory to avoid any data processing that may 
undermine the adequacy of data protection which exists within the 
Federal Republic of Nigeria.  
(2) Nothing in the NDP Act, this GAID, any legislation, or any legal in strument shall be 
deemed as authorising any form of data processing without compliance with Sections 
37 and 45 of the 1999 Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria. For ease of 
reference, the sections provide:  
 
Section 37 CFRN 1999: The privacy of citizens, their homes, 
correspondence, telephone conversations and telegraphic 
communications is hereby guaranteed and protected.  
 
Section 45(1) CFRN 1999: Nothing in sections 37, 38, 39, 40 and 41 of 
this Constitution shall invalidate any law that is reas onably justifiable in 
a democratic society (a) in the interest of defence, public safety, public 
order, public morality or public health; or (b) for the purpose of protecting 
the rights and freedom or other persons.                                       
  
          
29 
  
 
Article 2 4: Reliance on Vital Interest  
(1) A data controller may rely on vital interest as a lawful basis for the processing of 
personal data, particularly when circumstances do not permit the data subject to give 
consent to the processing.  
(2) The vital interest referred to in Sub -Article (1 ) of this A rticle may be that of the data 
subject or of a third party and it shall meet the conditions stipulated below:  
a) The processing is necessary for the preservation or protection of life or 
livelihood and failure or refusal to act may be harmful to the data subj ect or a 
third party;  
b) There is a legitimate expectation based on relationship or connection, operation 
of law, convention or prevailing norms that personal data should be processed in 
such circumstances of vital interest; and  
c) The data controller or data processor may be called into question as being 
negligent, unprofessional or reckless for failing to carry out the data processing 
in such adverse circumstance in which a vital interest is in jeopardy.  
(3) The method of processing employed for the purposes of v ital interest shall be 
necessary and proportionate.  
(4) The data controller shall give an account of its processing to the affected data subject, 
his or her representative in interest, or to a competent authority upon request.  
Article 2 5: Reliance on Public In terest  
(1) Public interest may be relied upon as a lawful basis of data processing in 
circumstances where there is:  
(a) a public health or humanitarian emergency; or  
(b) there is a clear and present danger to public safety; or  
(c) there is a need to address dire cases o f destitution or deprivation for the benefit 
of the data subject – in furtherance of the Fundamental Objectives and 
Directive Principles of State Policy or Sustainable Development Goals.  
(2) In addition to other obligations that may be imposed under the NDP Ac t, in any 
regulatory instrument issued by the Commission and any other legislation, a data 
controller shall take into account the safeguards in the provisions of Article 23 of this 
GAID when carrying out data processing on the ground of public interest.                                        
  
          
30 
  
 
(3) The method of processing employed for the purposes of public interest shall be 
necessary and proportionate.  
(4) Article 23 of this GAID regarding the evaluation of legal obligation shall also apply 
to the evaluation of public interest when it is relied upon as  a lawful basis of data 
processing.  
Article 2 6: Reliance on Legitimate Interest  
(1) A data controller shall cautiously consider reliance on legitimate interest as a lawful 
basis for data processing and shall be required in a complian ce audit to show the basis 
of its preference. A template of a Legitimate  Interest Assessment is in Schedule 8.  
(2) Section 25 (2) of the NDP Act makes compatibility with contract, vital interest, legal 
obligation or public interest, a basis for reliance on legitimate interest. According ly, 
it shall be mandatory for a data controller under the circumstances to:  
a) Carry out Legitimate Interest Assessment (as prescribed in Schedule 8) before 
embarking on data processing;  
b) Prioritise privacy by design and by default – taking into consideration the 
suitability of anonymisation or pseudonymisation;  
c) Identify and document the lawful basis of processing which is compatible with 
the legitimate interest pursued;  
d) Identify and eliminate data processing that may overreach the fundamental 
rights and freedoms of data subjects – particularly such processing that may 
lead to behavioural monitoring or profiling, or lead to targeted advertisement 
by third parties or partners;  
e) Identify and eliminate data processing that may lead to a breach of data 
confiden tiality, integrity and availability – taking into account vulnerable data 
subjects;  
f) Provide transparent information to data subjects in accordance with Section 27 
of the NDP Act;  
g) Provide for prompt remediation of data subjects ’ rights; and  
h) Prioritise data ethics and utmost duty of care.                                       
  
          
31 
  
 
Article 2 7: Consideration Regarding Information to Data Subjects  
(1) Provision of information to a data subject shall be in accordance with Section 27 of 
the NDP Act. The information shall be clear and shall take into considerat ion 
vulnerable data subjects.  
(2) In circumstances of exclusive physical events, interviews or interactions where a data 
controller or data processor may not be able to provide data subjects with a privacy 
policy or if provided, the class of data subjects may  not be able to understand the 
privacy policy without the aid of an interpreter, the data controller or data processor 
shall provide the information in the form that the data subject can understand.  
(3) The information to be provided by the data controller or data processor includes but 
is not limited to the following:  
a) The name of the data controller or data processor,  
b) Lawful basis of data processing,  
c) Types of personal data to be collected,  
d) The purpose of the processing,  
e) The means of processing,  
f) Access to perso nal data by authorised third parties,  
g) Purpose of access by third parties,  
h) Data subjects ’ rights,  
i) Access to prompt internal remediation through contact to be supplied by the 
data controller or data processor, and  
j) Right to lodge a complaint with the Nigeria Data Protection Commission.  
(4)  Information to data subjects does not constitute a request for consent. Consent shall 
be specifically requested and obtained when it is required by law and on the ground 
that the information which may guide the data subject in making an informed decision 
has been duly provided prior to the processing of personal data . 
Article 2 8: Data Privacy Impact Assessment  
(1) A Data Privacy Impact Assessment (DPIA) is mandated under Section 28 of the NDP 
Act when data processing may likely result in high risk to the rights and freedoms of 
a data subject by virtue of its nature, scope, context, and purposes.                                       
  
          
32 
  
 
(2) Introduction of new technologies or new processing techniques or directives 
mandating processing of personal data on a large scale requi res a DPIA on the 
following grounds:  
(a) Unintended, adverse consequences to the lives and livelihoods of data 
subjects may result from the data processing;  
(b) Such adverse consequences are threats to fundamental rights and freedoms as 
well as to the Fundamental Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy 
– which Policy forms the basis of sustainable development, security and 
economic programmes of govern ment; and  
(c) In circumstances where data processing measures constitute a derogation 
from Section 37 of the 1999 Constitution, they shall comply with the 
safeguards under Section 45 of the 1999 Constitution. In this regard, the need 
to fulfil the conditions of necessity and proportionality and other safeguards 
stipulated under Article 23 of this GAID is obligatory.  
(3) A DPIA is mandatory and shall be filed with the Commission in any of the following 
circumstances:  
a. Evaluation or scoring (profiling);  
b. Automated dec ision -making with legal or similar significant effects;  
c. Systematic monitoring;  
d. When sensitive or highly personal data is involved;  
e. When personal data processing relates to vulnerable data subjects;  
f. When considering the deployment of innovative processes or  applications, 
of new technological or organisational solutions which may pose a 
significant risk to the privacy of data subjects;  
g. Development of software for the purposes of enabling communication with 
data subjects;  
h. Financial services involving the proce ssing of personal data through digital 
devices;  
i. Health care services;  
j. E-Commerce services;  
k. Deployment of surveillance cameras in places that may be accessed by 
members of the public;  
l. Development and implementation of any legal instrument or policy which 
requires the processing of personal data of members of the general public;                                       
  
          
33 
  
 
m. Educational services involving processing of various records relating to 
students or pupils;  
n. Hospitality services; and  
o. Cross -border  data transfer.  
(4) A DPIA shall be vetted by a certified DPO duly accredited by the Commission.  
(5) The outcome of a DPIA conducted by a data controller or a data processor shall be 
part of the NDP Act CAR to be filed with the Commission.  
(6) Failure, refusal or negligence in the conduct of a DPIA may, among o ther 
enforcement provisions under PART X of NDP Ac t, result in a restriction on all 
platforms where data subjects may have contact with a data controller or a data 
processor for the purpose of carrying out any transaction in which personal data is 
required .  
(7) In carrying out a DPIA, a data controller or a data processor shall, in addition to the 
NDP Act, be guided by the provisions in this GAID.  
(8) In addition to the circumstances in Article 2 8 (3), a data controller or a data processor 
who deploys software for processing of sensitive personal data , among other datasets  
shall carry out a DPIA and submit same to the Commission within four (4) months 
after the issuance of this GAID.  
(9) Whenever requi red, a DPIA shall be carried out and submitted to the Commission 
before the commencement of data processing.  
(10) In any event, where data processing commenced before the coming into force of the 
NDP Act and this GAID, a DPIA shall be carried out within six (6)  months of the 
issuance of this GAID.   
(11) A DPIA which indicates that data processing may be carried out shall in addition to 
the contents prescribed under Section 28(4) of the NDP Act, contain measures which 
guarantee privacy by design and by default – and shall particularly take into account 
the following principles:  
(a) The need to be proactive and not reactive, preventive and not remedial;  
(b) Mitigation of risks through privacy as the default;  
(c) Prevention of risks through privacy by design practices;  
(d) Full functio nality – positive -sum, not zero -sum (such that no functionality is 
compromised because of another functionality);  
(e) End-to-end security – full lifecycle protection;  
(f) Visibility and transparency; and                                       
  
          
34 
  
 
(g) Respect for user privacy.  
(12) The DPIA submitted to the Commiss ion shall be signed by a duly certified DPO who 
is accredited by the Commission.  
(13) The DPIA shall be in accordance with Schedule 4 of the GAID.  
Article 29: Monitoring, Evaluation and Maintenance of Data Security System  
(1)  A data controller or data processor shall have schedules for monitoring, evaluation 
and maintenance of data security systems.  
(2) The schedule s shall take into account people, processes and technologies involved in 
data security and each shall contain applicable technical and organisational measures 
including but not limited to:  
(a) Training;  
(b) Certifications;  
(c) Updates of software;  
(d) Vulnerability tests of databases;  
(e) Assessment of hardware for repairs or replacements;  
(f) Authentication checks;  
(g) Encryption reviews; and  
(h) Quality Assurance on products and services being used for data 
confidentiality, integrity and availability.  
(3) A data controller or data processor shall assign relevant officers to carry out the tasks 
under the schedule and stipulate time to take appropriate technical and organisational 
measu res under the schedule.  
(4) The schedule shall be vetted and certified by a duly certified information security 
officer.  
(5) Notwithstanding the schedule, a data controller or data processor shall carry out 
monitoring, evaluation and maintenance of data security s ystems as frequently as 
possible, taking into account the risks of data processing.  
Article 3 0: Schedule for Internal Sensitisation and Training on Privacy  
(1)  A data controller or a data processor shall prepare and implement an organisational 
schedule for i nternal sensitisation and training on privacy.                                       
  
          
35 
  
 
(2) The schedule shall contain a mode of evaluating the level of compliance with the 
NDP Act, this GAID and other regulatory instruments issued by the Commission.  
(3) In respect of people, a data controller or data p rocessor may adopt the use of meetings, 
questionnaires and interviews.  
(4) The schedule shall be used to identify:  
(a) Data processing practices to stop,  
(b) Data processing practices to start, and  
(c) Data processing practices to continue.  
(5) A data controller or a data pro cessor shall publish the schedule on appropriate 
communication mediums where employees and other relevant workers, agents, and 
contractors, who are engaged in relevant activities may see it.  
(6) A data controller or data processor shall:  
(a) Review its data proces sing platforms,  
(b) Assign relevant officers to carry out the tasks under the schedule, and  
(c) Stipulate time to implement  appropriate technical and organisational measures.  
(7) In order to enable persons engaged in data processing to understand their duties and 
responsibilities, a data controller or data processor shall develop a basic privacy checklist 
as a guide.  
(8) A data controller or data processor shall develop and implement a written policy for 
routine checks on compliance practices which may be carried out w ithout notice to 
employees. This policy may be part of a larger data governance policy of the data 
controller or data processor.  
Article 3 1: Deployment of a Data Processing Software by a Data Controller or 
Data  Processor   
(1) A data controller or a data proces sor who (whether for itself or for other persons) 
deploys or intends to deploy data processing software for the purposes of tracking a 
data subject or enabling a communication link with a data subject and processing his 
or her personal data, is under an ob ligation to abide by the provisions of the NDP 
Act.  
(2) For the purposes of complying with this GAID and in addition to other obligations 
imposed on a data controller or a data processor, it is mandatory for the data 
controller or data processor in the circum stances referred to in Article 3 1 (1) to:  
a) Carry out a DPIA before the deployment of the software;                                       
  
          
36 
  
 
b) Ensure that the software is designed in accordance with the principles of privacy 
by design and by default;  
c) Without prejudice to any contrary provisions of th e NDP Act or regulatory 
instruments issued thereunder, ensure that the software follows data security 
guidelines or instructions provided in the stores where the software may be 
downloaded;  
d) Provide data privacy policy within the software;  
e) Provide a privacy  statement to data subjects (prospective users) prior to 
installation – expressly indicating the following:  
i. The types of personal data to be processed (types to be supplied by the data 
controller or data processor);  
ii. The lawful purpose for processing the p ersonal data (lawful purpose to be 
supplied by the data controller or data processor);  
iii. The personal data to be processed without prejudice to data subjects ’ right 
to privacy;  
iv. No personal data will be processed unless such personal data is crucial to 
the lawful purposes being pursued through the use of the software;  
v. Technical and organisational measures are implemented as part of privacy 
by design and by default (types of techn ical measures such as encryption 
should be specifically indicated);  
vi. A DPIA has been conducted and the result indicates that the use of the 
software is unlikely to compromise data privacy and protection;  
vii. Prompt technical support on data privacy and protect ion is accessible via 
the software (link shall be supplied by the data controller);  
viii. Self-service measures which may disable, uninstall or restrict the software 
is available (link shall be supplied by the data controller);  
ix. Redress of grievances , right to complain to a data protection authority - 
(link should be provided by the developer comprising a list of countries 
and their data protection authorities respectively).  
f) The required information in the privacy statement before the installation of  
the software shall be provided by a data controller or a data processor (as 
applicable) within six (6) months of the issuance of this GAID; provided that 
where the software is already in use by the data subjects prior to the issuance                                      
  
          
37 
  
 
of this GAID, an upda te shall be carried out within six (6) months in order to 
bring the software into compliance with the NDP Act and this GAID.  
(3) Examples of software referred to in this GAID are:  
(a) Operating System  
(b) Mobile Applications  
(c) Device Driver  
(d) Firmware  
(e) Programming Languag e Translator  
(f) Utilities  
Article 3 2: Measures Against Privacy Breach Abetment  
(1) A data controller or data processor shall put in place, appropriate technical and 
organisational measures to prevent the use of its platform, facility, network or 
howsoever called,  from being used to breach the privacy of a data subject.  
(2) When the Commission notifies a data controller or data processor that its platform, 
facility, network or howsoever called is being used by any person to commit an 
offence under the NDP Act or to car ry out a breach of privacy, the data controller or 
data processor shall immediately restrict such person on its platform, facility or 
network, pending the outcome of an investigation by the Commission.  
(3)  In determining if a breach of privacy has occurred, t he Commission shall only rely 
on credible documentary or electronic records.  
(4) Where a data controller or data processor fails, refuses or neglects to carry out the 
directives of the Commission to prevent further breach of privacy, the data controller 
or dat a processor shall be deemed as abetting a breach of privacy and shall be 
accountable for violation of the NDP Act as if it directly committed a breach of data 
privacy.  
Article 3 3: Data Breach Notification  
(1) The NDP Act under Section 40(2) provides that “a data controller shall, within 72 
hours of becoming aware of a breach which is likely to result in a risk to the rights 
and freedoms of individuals, notify the Commission of the breach and, where 
feasible, describe the nature of the personal data breach inclu ding the categories 
and approximate numbers of data subjects and personal data records concerned. ”                                      
  
          
38 
  
 
(2) A breach is likely to result in a high risk to the rights and freedoms of individuals if, 
considering the nature of the breach, the personal data involved as  well as the 
probability of accessing other personal data of the data subject through the breach, 
the data subject may become a victim of fraud, identity theft or exposure of sensitive 
personal data.  
(3) In line with Section 40(2) of the NDP Act, a data controller shall notify affected data 
subjects immediately after becoming aware of the breach in order to ensure that data 
subjects are not unlawfully targeted as a result of the breach. This is in furthera nce 
of the principle of duty of care and accountability.  
(4) Notwithstanding the time provided for the notification of a data breach, a data 
controller or data processor shall exercise a duty of care by providing immediate 
information on data breach to all re levant authorities including the Commission, if 
such immediate information may help in containing imminent data breaches on a 
national scale or when containment measures may be necessary at national, sectoral 
or at an individual level or where it may affec t members of the general public.  
(5) The content of a data breach notification to the Commission shall include the 
following among others:  
a) A description of the circumstances of the loss or unauthorised access or 
disclosure;  
b) The date or time period during whic h the loss or unauthorised access or disclosure 
occurred;  
c) A description of the personal information involved in the loss or unauthorised 
access or disclosure;  
d) An assessment of the risk of harm to individuals as a result of the loss or 
unauthorised access o r disclosure;  
e) An estimate of the number of individuals to whom there is a real risk of 
significant harm as a result of the loss or unauthorised access or disclosure;  
f) A description of steps the organisation has taken to reduce the risk of harm to 
individual s; 
g) A description of any steps the organisation has taken to notify individuals of the 
loss or unauthorised access or disclosure; and  
h) The name and contact information of a person who can answer on behalf of the 
organisation, the Commission ’s questions regar ding the loss of unauthorised 
access or disclosure of personal data .                                      
  
          
39 
  
 
Article 3 4: Data Processing Agreement  
(1) In line with Section 29(2) of the NDP Act, a data processor is expected to rely on a 
Data Processing Agreement (DPA) with the data controller in order to carry out data 
processing on behalf of the data controller.  
(2) In addition to other relevant terms and conditions as may be prescribed by law, a 
DPA shall include the following:  
a) Obligations of the data controller and data processor under Section 29 o f the 
NDP Act;  
b) Name of parties;  
c) Addresses of parties;  
d) Recitals containing reference to any Principal Agreement or Service Level 
Agreement;  
e) Purpose of data processing;  
f) Location of data processing (taking into account the provisions of the NDP Act 
on cross -border data transfer);  
g) Scope of the processing;  
h) Lawful bases of data processing;  
i) Responsibilities of parties under the DPA;  
j) Technical and Organisational Measures for data protection (if highly technical 
or scientific, it should be expressly outlined in a schedule to the DPA);  
k) The outcome of a DPIA where relevant;  
l) Potential risks;  
m) NDP Act compliance (evidence of registration with the Commission should be 
ascertained);  
n)  Confidentiality;  
o) Tenure;  
p) Specific Restrictions;  
q) Indemnity;  
r) Insurance;  
s) Force Majeure ; and  
t) Dispute Resolution.  
(3) A party to any DPA other than an individual data subject, shall take reasonable 
measures to ensure that the other party is compliant under the NDP Act, accountable                                      
  
          
40 
  
 
to the Commission or, in the case of a foreign party, to a compete nt regulatory 
authority outside Nigeria; accordingly, every data controller or data processor shall 
be accountable for the actions or inactions of third parties it engages or permits to 
carry out data processing.  
(4) Where a party to an agreement operates as a sole proprietorship, an individual agent 
or a self -employed worker, by reason of which he or she may not be organised to fulfil 
the obligations of corporate entities, such a person or individual shall for the purposes 
of his or her engagement in high -risk data processing, be required to be trained in data 
protection and privacy. Evidence of training and registration as a data processor of 
major importance shall be relied upon as a rebuttable proof of compliance with the 
NDP Act.  
Article 3 5: Benchmarking with Interoperable Data Privacy Measures  
(1) A data controller or data processor shall be cognisant of the need to advance data 
protection and privacy rights and the measures meticulously designed for this purpose 
in the globally interconnected and constantly evolving data protection ecosystem.  
(2) In the event that a data controller or data processor is to take a decision on an 
applicable technical and organisational measure for safeguarding data privacy rights, 
it is legally imperative to take into account the provisions of the extant Fundamental 
Right s Enforcement Procedure Rules in Nigeria on the importance of municipal, 
regional and international bill of rights.  
(3) In furtherance of Article 36 (1), (2), a data controller or data processor may, subject 
to the approval of the Commission, benchmark its data processing with Interoperable 
Data Privacy Measures (IDPMs) in circumstances where a specific directive is 
require d by the Commission under the NDP Act.  
(4) Where a data controller or data processor intends to benchmark with an IDPM which 
expressly requires directives of the Commission under the NDP Act, it shall seek the 
approval of the Commission through an application  stating the following:  
a) The name and address of the data controller or data processor,  
b) The nature of business,  
c) The purpose and lawful bas es of data processing,  
d) The nature of data processing in which an IDPM is required,  
e) The author and the jurisdiction of t he IDPM being proposed for approval,  
f) The benefit of the IDPM in data processing value chain,                                       
  
          
41 
  
 
g) The benefit of the IDPM to the ecosystem,  
h) Three (3) use cases of the IDPM,  
i) Any disadvantage of the IDPM, and  
j) The name and contact details of its certified DPO.  
(5) In furtherance of Sections 5(i) and 62(a)(ii) of the NDP Act, the Commission may 
within thirty (30) days, issue an approval for the benchmarking of data processing 
with an IDPM if it is satisfied that the use of such IDPM is without prejudice to the 
provisio ns of the NDP Act.  
(6) For the purposes of Article 35 (1) – (5), IDPM means best practice templates which 
are not limited by jurisdictional procedures and are particularly in furtherance of the 
globally interoperable principles of data protection as stipulated  in Section 24 of the 
NDP Act. Accordingly, instances where IDPM may be used include  but are not limited 
to: 
a) Anonymisation,  
b) Automated Decision Making,  
c) Child Online Protection,  
d) Data Portability,  
e) Data Subjects ’ Access Request,  
f) Data Privacy Impact Assessment,  
g) Deployment of Artificial Intelligence,  
h) Encryption,  
i) Forensic Data Security Audit,  
j) Legitimate Interest Assessment,  
k) Pseudonymisation, and  
l) Record of Processing Activities.  
(7) Without prejudice to the provisions of the NDP Act and any regulatory instrument 
issued by the Commission, a DPO is required to consider suitable IDPMs which may 
be used by a data controller or a data processor as part of global best practices in data 
processing. Accordingly, it is appropriate for a DPO to proactively review IDPMs 
prior to when the need for them arises. The Commission shall continuously provide 
guidance on IDPMs.                                       
  
          
42 
  
 
Article 3 6: Exercise of Right to Rectification  
(1) The right to data rectificatio n is essential to the operation of the principle of data 
accuracy under the NDP Act.  
(2) A data controller or processor shall ensure that the platforms through which it 
processes personal data also provides an effective opportunity for data rectification.  
(3) Data  rectification may not depend on the provision of an affidavit or a publication in 
a newspaper provided that the rectification is to bring the data into alignment with 
the personal data relating to the data subject ’s National Identification Number (NIN).  
(4) Where data rectification is for the purpose of correcting an error made by a data 
controller or a data processor in inputting the personal data of a data subject, the data 
subject shall not be required to pay in order to correct an error which is not his or  her 
fault. Accordingly, it is important to ensure that a data subject is provided with 
manifestly ample opportunity to verify his or her data before such data is submitted 
in a permanent format.  
(5) Whenever there is a dispute as to whether a data subject wa s provided with manifest ly 
ample opportunity to verify his or her personal data before being submitted in a 
permanent format, the data controller or data processor shall provide the evidence of 
the manifest ly ample opportunity. Accordingly, data processing  platforms together 
with the technical and organisational measures for their operations shall be designed 
in a way that may allow a data controller or data processor to audit any source of 
error.  
Article 3 7: Exercise of Right to Data Portability  
(1) A data sub ject has a right to data portability.  
(2) The right to data portability shall apply where the data subject provided the personal 
data on the basis of his or her consent or the processing is necessary for the 
performance of a contract. It may not apply where pr ocessing is based on a legal 
ground other than consent or contract.  
(3) The right to data portability may not apply against a data controller or data processor 
in the performance of its public duties; unless there is a compelling legitimate interest 
or right of a data subject that may be abridged by reason of denying the data subject ’s 
right of data portability.                                       
  
          
43 
  
 
(4) Where, in a certain set of personal data, more than one data subject is concerned, the 
right to receive the personal data should be without prejudice to the rights and 
freedoms of other data subjects in accordance with the NDP Act or any regulatory 
instrument issued by the Commission.  
(5) The right to data portability shall not prejudice the right of the data subject to obtain 
the erasure of personal data and the limitations of that right as prescribed under the 
NDP Act.  
(6) Nothing in this Article shall imply the erasure of personal data concerning the data 
subject which has been provided by him or her for the performance of a contract to 
the extent that and f or as long as are necessary for the performance of that contract.  
Article 3 8: Exercise of Right to be Forgotten  
(1) A data subject has the right to have his or her personal data erased if:  
a) The personal data is no longer necessary for the purpose a  data controller or data 
processor originally collected or processed it.  
b) A data controller or data processor  is relying on an individual ’s consent as the 
lawful basis for processing the data and that individual withdraws his or her 
consent.  
c) A data contro ller or data processor  is relying on legitimate interest as its 
justification for processing an individual ’s data, of which, the individual objects 
to this processing, and there is no overriding legal ground for the organisation to 
continue with the proces sing.  
d) A data controller or data processor  is processing personal data for direct 
marketing purposes and the individual objects to this processing.  
e) A data controller or data processor  processed an individual ’s personal data 
unlawfully.  
f) A data controller o r data processor  must erase personal data in order to comply 
with a legal ruling or obligation.  
(2) However, an organisation ’s interest in processing the personal data may override a 
data subject ’s right to be forgotten if:  
a) The data is being used to exercise the right of freedom of expression and 
information subject to the limit of derogation permitted under Section 45 of the 
1999 Constitution and other safeguards of the NDP Act.  
b) The data processing is necessary:                                       
  
          
44 
  
 
i. to comply with a legal ruling or obligation.  
ii. to perform a task that is being carried out in the public ’s interest or when 
exercising an organisation ’s official authority.  
iii. for public health purposes and to serve the public interest.  
iv. to perform preventative or occupational medicine. This only applies whe n 
the data is being processed by a health professional who is subject to a legal 
obligation of professional secrecy.  
c) The data represents important information that serves the public interest, 
scientific research, historical research, or statistical purpose s and where erasure 
of the data would likely impair or halt progress towards achieving the goal of the 
processing.  
d) The data is being used for the establishment of a legal defence or in the exercise 
of other legal claims.  
(3) Without prejudice to the provisions  of the NDP Act, where a data controller or data 
processor has made personal data public or has shared data with third parties, the data 
controller is under obligation to ensure the erasure of such personal data by the third 
parties at the request of the d ata subject or in compliance with the directives of the 
Commission in that regard.  
(4) This right may not apply where there is a public interest pursued by disclosure of the 
data to the general public – provided that the burden of proving the existence of a 
public interest shall be on the data controller who intends to keep the personal data 
public.  
Article 39: Exercise of Right to Lodge a Complaint with the Commission  
(1) The right to lodge a complaint with the Commission shall be deemed as a threshold 
right of redress in furtherance of the right to privacy under Section 37 of the 1999 
Constitution and Section 46 of the NDP Act.  
(2) Every regulation, policy, framework, or legal instrument which pertains to the 
processing of personal data shall in addition to all applicable data subject rights and 
safeguards contain a clause on the right to lodge a complaint with the Nigeria Data 
Protection Commission . 
(3) The Commission shall set up an electronic platform through which a data subject may 
lodge his or her complaint wit h the Commission and it shall acknowledge the receipt 
of the complaint within seven (7) days, provided that the Commission shall continue                                      
  
          
45 
  
 
to receive complaints by any reasonable means through which it may be contacted by 
a complainant (including but not li mited to hard copies at its known offices and 
emails).  
(4) Upon the receipt of a complaint in line with Section 46 of the NDP Act, the 
Commission shall carry out a preliminary evaluation of the complaint – taking into 
account:  
a) The applicability of the NDP Act  to the complaint;  
b) The urgency of the complaint and any urgent relief contained therein;  
c) The impact of the allegations on the complainant or on a third party on whose 
behalf the complaint is being lodged with the Commission; and  
d) The temporary remedy that may be provided pending the outcome of an 
investigation into the complaint.  
(5) Where the Commission is convinced through a preliminary evaluation that there is a 
violation of the NDP Act, it shall open a case file for the complaint.  
(6)  Upon the opening of a cas e file, the Commission shall immediately serve the affected 
data controller or data processor (hereafter referred to as the respondent) a notice of 
investigation.  
(7) The notice of investigation may require the respondent to provide, where applicable:  
a) The info rmation itemised under this  Sub-Article . 
b) The list of third -party data processors, agents or contractors engaged by the 
respondents for data processing together with data processing agreements and 
evidence of compliance with the NDP Act;  
c) Foreign countries to which the respondent transfers personal data together with 
the legal basis relied upon for the transfer;  
d) DPIA for technologies and methodologies relied on for personal data processing; 
and 
e) Name and official contact details of the resp ondent ’s DPO.  
(8) The respondent shall, except as otherwise specified by the Commission, reply the 
Commission within twenty -one (21) days.  
(9) If the Commission deems it appropriate, it shall invite the respondent to a Pre -Action 
Conference (PAC) in order to exam ine the facts and the available evidence provided 
by the parties or obtained by the Commission through investigation.  
(10) A PAC may take place as frequently as necessary in respect of a complaint or an 
investigation carried out by the Commission pursuant to Section 46(3) of the NDP Act.                                       
  
          
46 
  
 
(11) In line with the power vested in the Commission under Section 6(e) of the NDP Act, 
the Commission may direct a data controller or data processor to attend a PAC with 
any relevant person who is legally compellable or competent to give evidence and who 
may provide relevant information in determining an issue relating to violation of the 
NDP Act.  
(12) Where the Commission has determined that a violation of the NDP Act has taken place, 
it shall direct appropriate remedial action to be t aken by the respondent as prescribed 
by the NDP Act. The Commission shall communicate its decision to the complainant 
and to the affected parties within seven (7) days.   
(13) Nothing in this GAID shall prevent the Commission from issuing a temporary order 
on su ch terms and conditions as it deems fit in the interest of protecting the privacy 
right of a data subject – particularly when the violation of a data privacy right may not 
be remedied properly through compensation . 
Article 4 0: Data Subject ’s Standard Notic e to Address Grievance  
(1) In line with the power vested in the Commission to, among others, make regulations 
for the protection of personal data and data subjects under section 61(1) -(2)(b) of the 
NDP Act, the Commission may promote the use of Data Subject ’s Standard Notice 
to Address Grievance (SNAG)  as provided under Schedule 9 of this GAID.  
(2) An aggrieved data subject may issue a SNAG to a data controller or a data processor 
where the data subject reasonably believes that the data controller or data processor  
violated his or her right to data privacy.  
(3) SNAG shall not be regarded as a condition precedent for lodging a direct complaint 
with the Commission or for instituting an action, rather it shall be regarded as a 
standardised template for demanding internal remediation in an organisation which 
may be a cting in violation of a data subject ’s privacy.  
(4) SNAG may be served directly by a data subject or by a person acting under his or her 
authority or by a civil society organisation acting in the public interest.  
(5) The Commission may create an electronic platf orm through which it may track 
SNAGs.  
(6) Upon receipt of a SNAG, a data controller or a data processor shall communicate its 
decision on the SNAG to the Commission through the designated electronic platform.                                       
  
          
47 
  
 
(7) The Commission may take executive notice of SNAGs  and institute direct 
investigation into the service of a SNAG on a data controller or a data processor 
particularly when such SNAG appears to be unresolved.  
(8) A SNAG may be served on a data controller or a data processor via its physical 
address, telephone messaging medium, e -mail address, courier service or other 
reasonable means of correspondence.  
Article 4 1: Data Ethics, Privacy and Dignity of the Human Person  
(1) A data controller or a data processor shall prioritise the principles of data ethics which 
offer additional safeguards to the privacy and dignity of the human person.  
(2) To fortify the principles of the sanctity of personal information and the preservation 
of human dignity, both data controllers and data processors must steadfastly adhere to 
the tenets  of data ethics.  
(3) Data ethics, as enshrined in this Article, serves as an indispensable guide, elevating the 
standards of safeguarding individuals' privacy and upholding their inherent dignity. 
This entails a commitment to transparency, fairness, and respon sible data management 
practices.  
(4) Transparency forms the bedrock of ethical data handling. Data controllers and 
processors must furnish individuals with clear and comprehensible information 
regarding the collection, processing, and storage of their data. This ensures that 
individuals are w ell-informed, empowering them to make informed decisions about 
their personal information.  
(5) Fairness in data processing underscores the commitment to impartiality and equity. 
Discrimination based on gender, ethnicity, religion, physical ability or any other  
characteristic is strictly prohibited. Every individual is entitled to equal protection, 
fostering an inclusive digital landscape.  
(6) Responsible data management involves the implementation of robust security 
measures to protect against unauthorised access, breaches, or any form of misuse. It 
requires the continuous evaluation and enhancement of data protection protocols to 
adapt to evolving technological landscapes.  
(7) Emphasising the dignity of the human person, data controllers and processors must 
acknowledge  the intrinsic value of every individual's data. The extraction, processing, 
or utilisation of data must not compromise the autonomy, freedom, or integrity of any 
person.                                       
  
          
48 
  
 
(8) Any data collection or processing that may result in harm, discrimination, or violati on 
of individual rights is strictly prohibited. Safeguards should be in place to prevent the 
creation of profiles or the application of algorithms that could lead to prejudiced 
outcomes.  
(9) In cases where data is shared with third parties, explicit consent mu st be obtained from 
the data subject. The purpose, scope, and duration of such data sharing must be clearly 
communicated, and individuals should retain the right to revoke consent at any time.  
(10) Continuous education and awareness programs should be implement ed to keep 
individuals informed about their digital rights, empowering them to exercise control 
over their personal data.  
(11) The principles outlined in this article reflect a commitment to building a digital 
ecosystem that respects the fundamental rights of i ndividuals. By prioritising data 
ethics, we aim to create a responsible and trustworthy digital environment that values 
and protects the privacy and dignity of every human person.  
Article 4 2: Application of Global Best Practice on Data Ethics  
The global be st practice on the principles of data ethics to which a data controller or a data 
processor may be audited are:  
(1) Organisational Policy on Ownership of Data  – taking the following into 
consideration:  
(a) Personal data, to all intents and purposes, belong to the  natural person to whom 
it relates. Accordingly, it shall be construed as unethical to process data in a 
manner that the owner may object, taking into account, law, culture and faith.  
(b) Where there are ethical concerns on individual ’s expectations on the use  of his or 
her data, it is appropriate to anonymise the data and to only process it within the 
confines of the laws to which the individual is subject.  
(c) Where there are proceeds from the lawful use of other people ’s property – in this 
case, personal data - it is to be considered ethical for the user to create ample 
opportunity for them to benefit from the proceeds through corporate social 
responsibility or other similar measures.  
(2) Demonstrable Transparency and Accountability  – taking the following into 
consid eration:                                       
  
          
49 
  
 
(a) Processing of data shall not only be transparent;  it shall also be seen to be 
transparent through accountability.   
(b) The ethical standard particularly where the data controller is relying on consent, 
contract, vital interest, or legitimate interest, is to disclose all information upon 
which a data subject may make an informed decision.  
(c) Information that is expected to be  disclosed includes, the information required 
by the NDP Act to be disclosed generally to the data subjects and the following:  
i. Expected outcomes of the purpose of processing for the data controller 
and those with whom the data may be shared;  
ii. Capabilities o f the technology used for processing – particularly, the use 
of algorithms for profiling, the risks involved, mitigation of risks, and  
iii. Effective channel for redressing grievances.  
(d) A data controller or data processor who neglects to be demonstrably transpar ent 
may be acting in violation of the principle of transparency under the NDP Act. 
Thus, taking into account the ownership of data, the requirement for duty of 
care, and the liability of the controller or processor, may include a breach of 
trust.  
(e) Designati on of a DPO (and providing him or her with full support to carry out 
data protection tasks) as well as filing of NDP Act CAR with the Commission 
are part of the ways of demonstrating transparency and accountability.  
(3) Informational Autonomy or Informational Self-Determination – taking the following 
into consideration:  
(a) A data controller or data processor shall respect the informational autonomy of 
a data subject by making sure that his or her data are not carelessly, recklessly 
or negligently shared, even when  consent has been obtained.  
(b) Where sharing of information may lead to prejudice or abuses, efforts shall be 
made by the data controller or data processor to mitigate these risks.  
(c) Processing to portray, project or propagate indecent acts shall be regarded a s a 
violation of the principle of fairness under the NDP Act – initial consent of the 
data subject notwithstanding.  
(4) Fairness of Intention  – taking the following into consideration:  
(a) A data controller  or data processor  shall take the lawfulness of the purpo se of 
processing into account when processing personal data. The notion that what is 
not prohibited is permitted does not apply in data processing ethics.                                        
  
          
50 
  
 
(b) A data controller or data processor shall ensure that its intention is clear and 
understandable to the data subject – particularly in the context of consent, 
contract and legitimate interest.  
(5) Assessment of Outcomes  – taking the following into consideration:  
(a) A data controller or data processor shall put in place adequate technical and 
organisational me asures for the assessment and appreciation of data processing 
outcomes.  
(b) The measures may involve the use of sandboxes and simulations particularly 
where there is a likely or probable outcome of harm or injury to a data subject.  
(c) An outcome that is adversely  different from the original expectation of the 
processing, shall be treated as a disparate outcome which may upon 
investigation by the Commission, result in a liability for the violation of the 
principle of duty of care under the NDP Act.  
(d) A data controlle r or data processor shall take into consideration the interlinked 
character of human rights and their attribute of inalienability – subject to lawful 
derogations – when carrying out an assessment of outcomes.  
(e) A data controller or data processor is expected  to rely on a DPIA in order to 
assess the outcomes of a proposed data processing activity. Thus, while 
undertaking a DPIA, further analysis of potential disparate impact is required 
in order to achieve appropriate standards of data ethics in data processin g. 
(f) Assessment of Outcomes in this Article means a systematic analysis of the 
effect or result of data processing particularly on the enjoyment of other 
fundamental rights and freedoms.  
Article 4 3: Emerging Technologies  
(1) A data controller or a data processor  who deploys or intends to deploy Emerging 
Technologies (ETs) such as Artificial Intelligence, Internet of Things and Blockchain 
for the purposes of processing personal data shall take into consideration:  
(a) The provisions of the NDP Act,  
(b) Public Policy, and  
(c) This GAID, and other regulatory instruments issued by the Commission in 
order to safeguard the privacy of data subjects.  
(2) A data controller or a data processor who deploys or intends to deploy ETs for the 
purposes of processing personal data is expected to  set forth technical and                                      
  
          
51 
  
 
organisational parameters for the processing in order to design its ET tools in 
accordance with the threshold of data processing permitted by law – particularly 
taking into account the:  
a) Right of a data subject not to be subject to a decision solely based on 
automated processes or algorithms;  
b) Right to be forgotten – and the possibility of using synthetic data or 
tokenisation of personal data which may not be amenable to this right;  
c) Safeguards for the processing of sensitive personal data;  
d) Safeguards for child rights and other vulnerable groups;  
e) Regulation of cross -border data flows; and  
f) Privacy by design and by default.  
(3) The technical and organisational parameters are to be documented and filed with the 
Commission as part of NDP Act C AR. 
(4) A data controller or data processor under the circumstances contemplated by this 
Article shall:  
(a) Carry out a DPIA - particularly taking into account:  
i. Assessment of disparate outcomes of data processing.  
ii. Data Subjects ’ Vulnerability Indexes (DSVI) as stated in Schedule 6 and 
the DPIA shall be filed with the Commission as part of NDP Act CAR.  
(b) Determine the suitability of:  
i. Data anonymisation upon collection either directly from data subjects or 
from any legitimate source.  
ii. Testing the ETs in low -risk envi ronments where public interest may be 
served for a reasonable period and where significant outcomes of their use 
may be observed.  
(c) Determine whether there are disparate outcomes and the possibility of 
effectively addressing the disparate outcomes.  
(d) Retool an d return (repeatedly as occasions may warrant) to the controlled 
environment to re -test the ETs tools until satisfactory outcomes are achieved 
or a determination may be made to wholly discard the ETs tools on the ground 
of unmitigable risk to privacy.  
(e) Wher e a determination has been made that the ETs are safe for use, a data 
controller shall put in place a mechanism for continuous monitoring and 
evaluation in all circumstances where they may be deployed.                                        
  
          
52 
  
 
(5) In this Article, the “suitability ” or the “possibili ty” of a safeguard or an act implies 
an obligation on the part of a data controller or a data processor to take reasonable 
technical and organisational measures in guaranteeing fair and accountable use of 
data – taking into consideration data ethics and re gulatory audits.  
Article 4 4: Parameters for Assessing Privacy and Public Interest in Emerging 
Technologies  
(1) In line with Section 5(b) of the NDP Act, the Commission shall  foster the development 
of personal data protection technologies, in accordance with recognised international 
best practices and applicable international law; accordingly, the Commission shall 
accord priority to ETs which strengthen data privacy.  
(2)  In furtherance of Section 1(h) of the NDP Act towards strengthening the legal 
foundations of the national digital economy and guaranteeing the participation of 
Nigeria in the regional and global economies through the beneficial and trusted use of 
personal data, the Commission shall take into account the utilitarian value of ETs in 
achieving sustai nable development through lawful processing of personal data.  
(3) A data controller or data processor who intends to process personal data in the 
circumstances contemplated by Article 4 4 (2), may benchmark with global consensus 
on ETs such as the United Natio ns Resolution on Artificial Intelligence. Accordingly, 
data controllers and data processors shall, among other self -correcting measures, 
refrain from or cease the use of ET systems that are impossible to operate in 
compliance with international human right s law or that pose undue risks to the 
enjoyment of human rights.    
Article 4 5: Cross -Border Data Transfer  
(1) Part VIII of the NDP Act provides for cross -border data transfer. By virtue of Section 
63 of the NDP Act, the provisions of Part VIII of the NDP Act shall be the 
overarching, governing provision in all matters pertaining to cross -border transfer of 
persona l data from Nigeria.  
(2) Pending the issuance of any regulatory instrument by the Commission on cross -
border data transfer, the explanatory note in Schedule 5 of this GAID shall be used 
for the evaluation of countries for the purposes of determining their level of adequacy 
and for other grounds of cross -border data transfer recognised under the NDP Act.                                       
  
          
53 
  
 
(3) In respect of safeguards for data subjects ’ rights in a country, the Commission shall 
take into account the enforcement of fundamental rights in general and  the decisions 
of courts which seek to advance fundamental freedoms in such jurisdictions being 
considered for adequacy decisions.  
Article 4 6: Capacity Building in Data Protection and Continuous Professional 
Development Credits  
(1) Capacity building is mandato ry as an organisational  measure of data privacy and  
protection.  
(2) In furtherance of Section 5(e) -(f) of the NDP Act and taking into account the high 
technical skill required, the Commission shall foster capacity building and 
professional development in data  protection and privacy.  
(3) All employees and other persons who are engaged by the data controller or data 
processor shall be trained and sensitised periodically on emerging developments in 
data processing and to such an extent that is reasonably relevant to their job 
descriptions respectively.  
(4) The Commission may develop a mechanism in place for the training, and the award 
of certifications on Data Privacy and Protection.  
Article 4 7: Jurisdiction of Court and Access to Justice  
(1) Without prejudice to binding pre cedents of courts, a data subject has a right to seek 
redress of the violation of his or her data privacy rights – in line with Section 46 of 
the 1999 Constitution.  
(2) Access to justice for the purposes of national adequacy of data protection includes 
proximity and access to courts of justice particularly in the context of civil liberties 
and fundamental freedoms. Accordingly, regardless of the parties involved and the 
material context of data processing, a data subject may seek redress for the violatio n 
of his or her right to privacy at the closest Federal or State High Court in line with 
settled precedents of the Supreme Court of Nigeria and extant Fundamental Rights 
Enforcement Procedure Rules.                                       
  
          
54 
  
 
Article 4 8: Evidence of Compliance with the NDP Act  
(1) Evide nce by a data controller or a data processor relating to compliance with the NDP 
Act or any regulatory instrument issued by the Commission shall be evaluated in the 
context they directly relate to.  
(2) Compliance in relation to registration, filing of annual CAR, submission of DPIA or 
cross -border transfer instruments approved by the Commission shows commitment 
to accountability and prima facie good faith in data processing. It does not replace 
the need to provide concrete evidence in defence of any complaint of violation 
relating to other provisions of the NDP Act.  
(3) The Commission, in furtherance of Section 48(6)(f) of the NDP Act shall take 
compliance in terms of accountability as a partial fulfillment of cooperation.  
Article 49: Consideration of Time -Bound and Non -Time -Bound Obligations  
(1) The need to safeguard the rights and freedoms of a data subject as guaranteed under 
Section 37 by the 1999 Constitution shall be the overriding consideration in 
considering whether a data controller or a data processor has fu lfilled any obligation 
within a stipulated time or within a reasonable or an appropriate time.  
(2) Where the NDP Act or any regulatory instrument issued thereunder does not make an 
obligation to be timebound, it is expected that such obligation shall be disch arged 
timeously taking into account the urgency of such obligation to the realisation of the 
rights and interests of the data subjects that are immediately connected to them, and, 
also, taking into account that if such obligation is not performed within a definite 
time frame which may be provided by the data subject, the rights and interests of the 
data subject may likely be abridged or defeated.  
(3) In circumstances requiring storage limitation, where no timebound obligation has 
been provided by law, the stora ge time for the purpose of data processing shall lapse 
not later than six (6) calendar months when the original purpose of the processing has 
been accomplished.  
(4) Notwithstanding Article 49(3) and subject to the principles of data protection under 
section 24  of the NDP Act, a data controller may store personal data with appropriate 
technical and organisational measures for the purposes of defence of a legal claim  or 
due diligence.                                       
  
          
55 
  
 
Article 5 0: Supplementary Regulations, Directives and Schedules  
(1) The Commission  may at any time issue supplementary regulations and directives for 
the purposes of amending this GAID ; accordingly , a data controller or a data 
processor shall comply with the provisions of the supplementary instrument as may 
be issued by the Commission.  
(2) Where necessary, the Commission may issue directives or guidance which may be 
annexed as schedules to this GAID.  
(3) In the event of a conflict between this GAID and a supplementary regulation or 
directiv e issued by the Commission , the provisions of the supple mentary regulation 
or directive shall prevail.  
Article 5 1: Review of Administrative and Financial Obligations under Special            
Grounds  
(1) The Commission may use its discretion to review any administrative or financial 
obligation under this GAID or whi ch falls within the discretion of the Commission if 
such obligations cannot be fulfilled, taking into account any one of the following 
grounds:  
(a) Bankruptcy of the affected data controller or data processor;  
(b) Legal encumbrances brought about by judicial proce edings;  
(c) Dire humanitarian conditions; and  
(d) Necessities of implementing fiscal or developmental policy, and on the ground 
that if such necessities are not considered, they may be defeated by the 
obligations.  
(2) A data controller or a data processor or an inte rvener who seeks a review under this 
Article shall specifically demonstrate how any ground for review stated in Article 
51(1) applies to a data controller or a data processor or to an intervener.  
(3) Application for a review under this Article shall be made in  writing to the National 
Commissioner and Chief Executive Officer of the Commission and it shall be 
supported by a verifying affidavit stating, among others:  
(a) The name of the affected data controller or data processor or intervener;  
(b) The contact address;  
(c) The designated DPO and his or her contact;                                       
  
          
56 
  
 
(d) The nature and scope of data processing;  
(e) A summary of facts in proof of the ground or grounds relied upon; and  
(f) A declaration of commitment to the principles of data protection and 
safeguards for the rights and freedoms of data subjects.  
(4) The Commission shall within forty -five (45) days upon the receipt of the application, 
verify the claims of the applicant stating whether or not the application is meritorious 
or request for further information and further and bet ter affidavit where the 
circumstances warrant.  
(5) Nothing in this GAID shall result in the grant of a waiver to the detriment of the rights 
and interests of a data subject.  
Article 5 2: Definitions  
“appreciation of outcomes ” means a systematic analysis of the  effect or result of 
data processing.  
“basic privacy checklist ” means a simple list of steps a worker should take when 
dealing with personal data.  
“data protection officer ” is an expert in data protection law and practices . He or she  
ensures, in an indepe ndent manner, that an organisation complies with the laws 
relating to processing individual ’s personal data.  
 “data subject access request ” is a request directed to the organisation by a data 
subject, granting the data subject right to access information about personal data the 
organisation is processing.  
“disparate outcome or disparate impact ” means an adverse effect of carrying out 
an appropriate task.  The task becomes inappropriate and unlawful if it could result 
in a disparate outcome.  
“domiciliation ” means the state of living or permanently residing in a place. 
Domiciliation of a data controller or data processor outside Nigeria does not mean 
an exemption from the obligations imposed by the NDP Act or any regulatory 
instruments issued under the NDP A ct. The major point is in data processing; if the 
data subject is in Nigeria, then the NDP Act protects him or her.  
 “duly certified ” means certified by an institution that is accredited or approved by 
a competent authority in data privacy protection or in  educational services.  
“infraction ” means any degree of violation of the law or a regulatory instrument.  
“interface with ” means communication with a data subject involving the processing 
of personal data.                                       
  
          
57 
  
 
“interoperable data privacy measures ” are essential ly tools and approaches that 
ensure different data protection laws and frameworks work together seamlessly.  
“lodge a complaint ” means to report a wrongful or perceived wrongful act.  
“may” when used in the context of an obligation in this GAID, indicates t hat there 
exist accountability safeguards for regulatory actions for data controllers or data 
processors to take into consideration.  It does not imply that the obligation is merely 
advisory.  
“platform of data processing ” means any medium through which a data controller 
or a data processor handles personal data.  
“record of processing activities ” means a record of data processing activities under 
a data controller ’s responsibility, including all categories of processing activities.  
“regulatory instruments ” mean laws, regulations, directives, codes, guidelines and 
guidance notices and certifications.  
“relevant authority ” means a data protection authority or a competent  authority 
having jurisdiction over the subject matter of the data processing activity .  
 “sandbox ” means a controlled environment where an initiative or technology may 
be tested before being deployed in a targeted or intended environment.  
“sub-national or sectoral framework ” is any regulatory instrument issued for the 
purposes of operating with in a state, local government area or a sector of the 
economy.  
“sustainable development ” means a type of development that promotes resilience 
and inclusiveness such as the Fundamental Objectives and Directive Principles of 
State Policy and United Nations Sustainable Development Goals.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                      
  
          
58 
  
 
 
SCHEDULES TO  
NIGERIA DATA PROTECTION ACT -GENERAL APPLICATION AND 
IMPLEMENTATION DIRECTIVE, 2023  
 
 
 Schedule 1 - Principles of Data Protection  
 Schedule 2 - NDP Act Compliance Audit Returns  
 Schedule 3 – Data Protection Officer  Assessment  
 Schedule 4 - Data Privacy Impact Assessment  
 Schedule 5 - Guidance on Cross -Border  Data Transfer  
 Schedule 6 - Data Subject ’s Vulnerability Indexes  
 Schedule 7 - Guidance Notice on Registration of Data Controllers and                  
                     Processors of Major Importance  
 Schedule 8 - Legitimate Interest Assessment Template  
 Schedule 9 - Data Subject ’s Standard Notice to Address Grievance  
 Schedule 10 - NDP Act Compliance Audit Returns Filing Fee  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                     
  
          
59 
  
 
 
 
SCHEDULE 1  
PRINCIPLES OF DATA PROTECTION  
Explanatory Note: Principles of data protection constitute the foundational safeguards of data 
privacy and protection frameworks. The degree of reliance on the principles in any form of data 
processing is to be regarded as the measure of respect a data con troller or a data processor has for 
the data subject concerned. The degree of reliance may be examined through the specific outline of 
technical and organizational measures a data controller or a data processor takes or intends to take 
to implement the pri nciples of data protection.  
A data controller or data processor shall prioritise “privacy by design and by default ” in order to 
guarantee compliance with the principles of personal data protection.  This means that at the outset 
of devising technical and organizational measures, the focus should be on the responsibility of the 
data controller or data processor to minimise the risk factors that may exist as a result of engagement 
with data subjects (for data processing) or unauthorised access, loss or damage of personal data 
and maximi se the controls for the security and privacy of the collected data.   
1. 24(1)(a) of the NDP Act:  A data controller or data processor shall ensure that personal data 
is - 
 processed in “a fair, lawful and transparent manner. ” 
i. “Fair” means the data processing  is free from prejudice and exploitation and it is 
generally consistent with civil liberties in a democratic society.  
ii. “Lawful ” means the data processing is founded on at least one of the legal grounds of 
data processing recognized under Section 25 of the NDP Act and it does not violate any 
law or principle of law in Nigeria. Nigerian Court precedents on human rights 
enforcement which respects advancement of fundamental freedoms in other 
jurisdictions  shall be favourably considered for the purposes of evalu ating the 
lawfulness of data processing.  
iii. “Transparent ” means due disclosure of all material facts that may help a data subject 
and the Commission to take informed decisions. Even where consent or contract is not 
the lawful bas es relied upon for data proce ssing, disclosure of material facts for the 
purposes of regulatory oversight is paramount. A Record of Processing Activities 
(ROPA) shall in addition to other informational documents required by the NDP Act 
disclose the material facts referred to in this p aragraph. See Sections 27 and 34 of the 
NDP Act on the information to be provided to a data subject.   
2. 24(1)(b) of the NDP Act:   A data controller or data processor shall ensure that personal 
data is -  
“collected  for specified, explicit, and legitimate purposes, and not to be further 
processed in a way incompatible with this purpose; ” 
                                     
  
          
60 
  
 
i. “Specified ” purpose means the declared and exact intention of a data controller or 
data processor. This is the responsibility of th e concerned data controller or data 
processor.  
ii. “Explicit ” purpose means the words used to describe the purpose are free from 
ambiguity. Where practicable, appropriate, images otherwise known as 
“infographics ” or audiovisuals may be used to illustrate the purpose of the data 
processing. The simplicity and clarity of language is essential to “explicit 
purpose ”.  Account must be taken of the class of data subjects targeted in the data 
processing. See Section 27(3) of the NDP Act.  
iii. “Legitimate ” purpose means a bona fide intention of data processing. A purpose 
shall not be regarded as legitimate if it overrides the rights and interests of a data 
subject and it has no basis in law or public policy.  
iv. “Compatible further processing ” means any form of processing which  essentially 
fosters the realisation of the original purpose or constitutes an innovative 
progression of the original purpose. Further processing shall not be regarded as 
compatible if it overrides the rights and interests of a data subject and it has no 
basis in law or public policy.  
v. Processing or further processing of personal data which enables a data processing 
platform to monitor a data subject ’s behaviour for the purpose of systematic 
matching of such behaviour with advertisements or contents without the explicit 
and voluntary consent of the data subject as prescribed under Section 26 of the 
NDP Act  shall not be deemed as compliant with the principle of “specified, 
explicit, and legitimate purposes. ” 
3. Section 24(1)(c) of the NDP Act: A data controller o r data processor shall ensure that 
personal data is – “Adequate, relevant, and limited to the minimum necessary for the 
purposes for which the personal data was collected or further processed; ” 
i. “Adequate ” means appropriate quantity and quality of personal data.  
ii. “Relevant ” means materially useful and indispensable in the fulfilment of 
the specified, explicit, and legitimate purposes.  
iii. “Minimum necessary ” means the least possible data which is essential to the 
fulfilment of the specified, explicit, and legitim ate purposes should be 
collected.  
4. Section 24(1)(d) of the NDP Act : A data controller or data processor shall ensure that 
personal data is – “retained for not longer than it is necessary to achieve the lawful bases 
for which the personal data was collected  or further processed; ” 
i. “Retained ” is a form of data processing which means keeping personal data for 
specified, explicit, and legitimate purposes.  
ii. Once the specified, explicit, and legitimate purposes have been achieved or no 
longer pursued, the legitima te grounds for retaining the data ceases to exist.                                       
  
          
61 
  
 
iii. A data controller or a data processor must have a clear data retention – otherwise 
called data storage – policy.  
iv. Without prejudice to the priority of the NDP Act as stipulated under Section 63, 
the retent ion policy should be consistent with relevant laws.   
v. Whenever it is essential to retain data solely for record purposes, a data controller 
or data processor should determine the minimum data that is relevant and 
necessary for the record purposes.  
vi. Any resi due of data that is not needed should be properly destroyed or irreversibly 
de-identified.  
vii. A data controller or data processor is under obligation to communicate its data 
retention policy to data subjects. The information to data subject in respect of data  
retention must clearly indicate the implication for Data Subject ’s Access Request 
(DSAR).  
5. Section 24(1)(e) of the NDP Act : A data controller or data processor shall ensure that 
personal data is - “accurate, complete, not misleading, and, where necessary, kept up to 
date having regard to the purposes for which the personal data is collected or is further 
processed; ” 
i. “accurate ” means the data being processed or intended for processing is free 
from foreseeable errors. The data controller or data processor mus t therefore 
put in place appropriate technical and organisational measure to ensure data 
accuracy. The data controller or the data processor shall put in place a 
functional and efficient system of data rectification for the benefit of data 
subjects. This a lso presupposes existence of an opportunity for the data subject 
to review his or her data with the data controller or data processor.  
ii. “complete ” means wholeness of personal data in relation to the specified, 
explicit, and legitimate purposes of data proc essing.  
iii. “not misleading ” means the personal data collected and its processing are 
trustworthy representation of the personal data, the processing, the data subject 
and all material facts.  
iv. “up to date” means that personal data is contemporary in relation t o the data 
subject and the data processing. The data controller or the data processor shall 
put in place an efficient system of data for periodic review of personal data to 
ensure its currency or contemporaneity.   
6. Section 24(1)(f) of the NDP Act : A data c ontroller or data processor shall ensure that 
personal data is – “processed in a manner that ensures appropriate security of personal 
data, including protection against unauthorised or unlawful processing, access, loss, 
destruction, damage, or any form of data breach. ” 
i. Data controllers and data processors must carefully access the risks to personal 
data and data subjects in accordance with the provisions of Section 39 of the 
NDP Act.                                       
  
          
62 
  
 
ii. Appropriate technical and organisational measures must be taken to address 
identified risks.  
iii. Data controllers and data processors of major importance must determine its 
security measures vis -à-vis the outcomes of Data Privacy Impact Assessment 
(DPIA). See  Section 28 of the NDP Act and Schedule 4 of this GAID.  
iv.  In all circumstances of data processing, security risk assessment shall be carried 
out with reasonable consideration for V olatility, Uncertainty, Complexity and 
Ambiguity (VUCA) of both internal and external environment where the data 
processing is taking place or intended to take place. This environment includes 
but is not limited to foreign jurisdictions targeted for cross -border data flows.   
v.  A data controller or data processor shall take reasonab le measures to mitigate 
risks to the V olume, Value, Veracity, Velocity and Variety of data.  
7. Section 24(2) of the NDP Act: A data controller and data processor shall use appropriate 
technical and organisational measures to ensure confidentiality, integrity , and availability of 
personal data.  
a) “Appropriate ” means reasonable measures taking into consideration all material 
privacy factors including but not limited to the data privacy rights, Data Subject ’s 
Vulnerability Index (DSVI) in accordance with Schedule 6 of this GAID, foreseeable 
threats, technology, data sensitivity and resources.  
b) “Technical ” (otherwise referred to as technological whenever the context permits) 
means the technology and expertise required in ensuring data protection.  
c) “Organisational ” means operational rules, regulations, codes, ethics standards, 
controls or procedures laid down by a data controller or data processor. Effectual and 
periodic training and sensitisation on data privacy is a pivotal part of organisational 
measure.   
d) “Confident iality ” means secrecy and exclusionary nature of personal data. A data 
controller or data processor must ensure that personal data is appropriately categorised 
in order to put requisite access control measures in place.  
e) “Integrity ” means defined properties  of personal data free from any form of 
unauthorised variation. Where variation of a non -personal data may lead to 
unauthorised variation of personal data, the non -personal data shall be considered as 
an intrinsic part of the personal data. Such non -person al data must be properly 
accounted for and secured.  
f) “Availability ” means personal data in a useable or processable state. In relation to the 
data subject, a data controller or data processor shall put in place appropriate technical 
and organisational measures to ensure that personal data is available for sp ecified, 
explicit and legitimate purposes. In addition, it should be available for the purposes of 
data subject access request and data portability.  
                                      
  
          
63 
  
 
8. Section 24(3) of the NDP Act: Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this NDP Act or 
any other law, a  data controller or data processor owes a duty of care, in respect of personal 
data processing, and shall demonstrate accountability, in respect of the principles contained 
in this NDP Act.  
a) “Duty of care ” means the responsibility of a data controller or da ta processor to carry out 
data processing professionally and ethically with a view to preventing avoidable harm or 
injury to the data -subject.  
b) To demonstrate duty of care, a data controller or data processor is under obligation to 
align its data processing activities with the reasonably high standard of care. This may be 
evaluated based on industry standard and contemporary best practice.   
c) “Cont emporary best practice ”, “best practice ”, “good practice ” “global best practice ” or 
however called when used in relation to standard of compliance or performance of a duty, 
means the process or technology employed for carrying out a task is current, tested  and 
trusted.   
d) Inference as to the currency or trustworthiness should be drawn from verifiable used 
cases and credible expert reviews.  
e) Where available, reputable certifications or codes of conduct may be relied upon as a 
ground of inference as to the sta ndard of care provided by a data controller or data 
processor.  
f)  “Accountability ” means being:  
i. transparent;  
ii. meticulous in keeping record of processing activities;  
iii. promptly responsive to complaints and requests;  
iv. promptly responsive to regulatory procedures  and directives; and  
v. committed to the principles of data protection.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                
 
 
 
                                      
  
          
64 
  
 
 
   SCHEDULE 2  
NDP ACT COMPLIANCE AUDIT RETURNS (CAR)  
Pursuant to Section 6 (d) of NDP Act, 2023.  
 
Name of Organisation  
Address  
Phone  Email  
DPO ’s Name  Email  
DPCO ’s Name  Email  
Sector  
Estimated Number of Data Subjects  
PART 1: PEOPLE AND PROCESS (GOVERNANCE)  
S/N 
 
1(A)  AUDIT 
PARAMETERS  NDP  
Act/ 
GAID  TYPES OF ANSWERS  
YES  NO FACTS  
1. Is the organisation 
currently registered 
with the NDPC for data 
processing?  
 S.44-
45  
Art. 9   Provide Registration number . 
2. Is there a designated 
Data Protection Officer 
(DPO) for the 
organisation?  S.32 
Art. 11     
3. Is the DPO a member of 
staff or a consultant?  
 S.32    
4. Is the DPO trained in 
data privacy and 
protection?  
 S.32 
Art. 
12(2)  
(c)    
5. Is the DPO certified by 
duly accredited 
certification body for 
data protection?  S.32 
Art 14   Provide Accreditation number . 
6. Is the DPO participating 
in Continuous 
Professional 
Development training?  
 S.32 
Art. 12    
7. Did the DPO obtain the 
required Continuous S.32   Provide Continuous Professional 
Development Credit.  
                                     
  
          
65 
  
 
Professional 
Development Credit 
within 12 months?  
 Art. 
14(8) 
8. Does the organisation 
have a schedule for 
capacity building on 
data protection for all 
employees and persons 
engaged to work on 
their premises or engage 
with their data subjects?   
 S.24 
(2)(3)  
Art. 30    
9. Does the organisation 
carry out the training as 
provided in the 
schedule?  
 S.24 
(2)(3)  
Art. 3 0    
10. Does the organisation  
have a Basic Privacy 
Checklist (BPC) of 
“Dos and Don ’ts” on 
data privacy provided 
for all persons working 
for or with the 
organisation as 
prescribed under Article 
31(7) of the NDP Act -
GAID?  
 S.24 
(2)(3)  
Art.3 0
(7)    
11. Is the Basic Privacy 
Checklist part of the 
annexure to the 
organisation ’s NDP Act 
CAR as prescribed 
under the NDP Act 
GAID?  S.24 
(2)(3)  
S.39 
S.6(e)  
Art. 
30(7)    
12. Please select                                                                                                                                                                                               
from the list “types of 
answers ” column, the 
type of  facts that 
describe the 
organisation ’s data 
protection practices.  
 S.24 
   a. The organisation has a written 
schedule it follows for the 
general review of all of its data 
processing platforms and 
practices . 
  
b. Only a certain category of data 
processing in the organi sation 
has a schedule; and the                                       
  
          
66 
  
 
organi sation follows this 
schedule.  
c. Procedures in the organi sation 
ensure that data subject ’s rights 
are safeguarded in line with the 
NDP Act.   
d. At least one procedure in the 
organi sation may not safeguard 
data subject ’s rights   
e. The organi sation has a 
procedure for ensuring that it 
obtains informed consent of the 
data subject in line with the 
NDP Act.   
f.  The process for obtaining 
informed consent needs more 
improvement.   
g. In the event of offering services 
to children and persons without 
legal capacity, appropriate 
safeguards have been put in 
place to obtain approval from 
concerned parents or guardians. 
Other measures required 
ethically and legally are 
implemented.   
h. In the event of offering services 
to children and persons without 
legal capacity, there is little or 
no evidence that appropriate 
safeguards have been put in 
place to obtain approval from 
concerned parents or guardians. 
Other measures required 
ethically and legally are yet to 
be implemented or are still 
being developed.   
i. The organisation has a written 
policy for routine checks on 
compliance practices which 
may be carried out without 
notice to employees.   
   j. The organisation does not have 
a written policy for routine 
checks on compliance practices                                       
  
          
67 
  
 
which may be carried out 
without notice to employees.  
k. The organisation  carries out 
routine checks on compliance 
practices which may be carried 
out without notice to 
employees.   
l. The organization relies on data 
pseudonymisation, 
anonymisation  and encryption 
methods to reduce exposure of 
personal data.   
m. The organi sation has no 
implemented data 
pseudonymisation, 
anonymisation  or encryption 
methods to reduce exposure of 
personal data.   
n. The organisation checks for 
data protection compliance 
when procuring new software 
for data collection purposes.   
   
1(B) PRINCIPLES OF 
DATA PROTECTION   
 
Please select from the 
list “types of answers ” 
column, the type of 
facts that describe the 
organisation ’s 
alignment with the 
principles of data 
protection.  S.24    By its written policy and in 
actual practice as observed  
during an audit of all its data 
processing platforms and 
practices, data processing in the 
organisation follows the 
principles of data protection on 
the ground that:   
a. Data processing in the 
organisation is fair, lawful and 
transparent.   
b. It specifically makes sure that 
the processing does not override 
the interests of the data subjects.   
c. It is not in violation of any law 
or public policy in Nigeria;  
it is reasonable, based on mode 
of communication and direct 
engagement (in major 
indigenous languages and in 
info-graphics) to state that the 
data subject is fully aware  of at                                       
  
          
68 
  
 
least some of the major data 
processing in the organisation.  
d. Data subjects are aware of at 
least some of the major data 
processing activities in the 
organisation.   
e. The processing in all 
circumstances is limited to the 
purpose for which the personal 
data was/will be collected.    
 
Specific and observable ef forts 
have been made to ensure that 
the data being processed is 
minimal, adequate and relevant 
to what is actually needed.   
f. Specific and observable efforts 
have been made to ensure that 
personal data is not stored 
longer than the period of 
usefulness in relation to its 
lawful purpose and it is 
appropriately deleted or 
irreversibly de -identified to 
guarantee the privacy of the 
data subject to whom it relates.   
g. Specific and observable efforts 
have been made to ensure that 
some personal data for research 
purposes have been irreversibly 
de-identified to guarantee the 
privacy of the data subject to 
whom it relates.   
h. Specific and observable efforts 
have been made to ensure that 
personal data is accurate, 
complete, not misleading and, 
complaints of inaccuracies (if 
any) are in practice resolved 
within 21 days or before such 
complaints become a source of 
frustration to d ata subjects 
(whichever is conducive to the 
circumstances of an affected 
data subject).                                        
  
          
69 
  
 
i. Specific and observable efforts 
have been made to ensure that 
the Confidentiality, Integrity 
and Availability of personal data 
is not compromised.   
   
        
1(C)  LAWFUL BASES 
FOR PROCESSING  
 
Please select from the 
list “types of answers ” 
column, the type of 
facts that describe your 
organisation ’s lawful 
bases.   S. 25    a. Consent   
b. Legal Obligation   
c. Contract   
d. Vital Interest   
e. Public Interest   
f. Legitimate Interest   
   
   
 Please select from the 
list “types of answers ” 
column, the type of 
facts that describe the 
organisation ’s lawful 
bases.  S. 25    a. Consent   
b. Legal Obligation   
c. Contract   
d. Vital Interest   
e. Public Interest   
f. Legitimate Interest   
   
1(D)  PROFILING AND 
MARKETING  
 
Please select from the 
list “types of answers ” 
column, the type of 
facts that describe the 
organisation ’s lawful 
bases. S. 25    a. Consent   
b. Legal Obligation   
c. Contract   
d. Vital Interest   
e. Public Interest   
f. Legitimate Interest   
   
   
 
PART 2 : TECHNOLOGY (DATA SECURITY CONTROLS AND STANDARDS)  
2(A)  
 
 
 
 
 DATA PROCESSING 
AND ACCESS 
CONTROLS   
 
Please select from the 
list “types of answers ” 
column, the type of 
facts that describe the 
organisation ’s access 
control measures .   Ss.24
& 39   a. The organisation has a central 
database (or server) for personal 
data.  
b. The organisation does not have 
a central database (or server) for 
personal data.   
c. The organisation has other files 
or registers for personal data 
outside the database (or server).   
d. The organisation  does not have 
other files or register(s) outside                                       
  
          
70 
  
 
the central database (or server) 
for personal data.  
e. Only authorised personnel can 
access the physical space 
provided for the central 
database (or server).   
f. Members of staff generally do 
have access to the physical 
location of the database (or 
server).   
g. The physical location of the 
database (or server) is specially 
secured apart from the general 
security.   
h. Members of staff may access 
the database (or server) even 
when they are not specifically 
authorised.   
i. Only authorised personnel can 
access other files or registers 
containing personal data.   
j. Other personnel could access 
other files or registers 
containing personal information 
without being specifically 
authorised.   
k. Every file or register - in every 
location of the organisation  - 
containing personal data are 
kept in a confidential form and 
place not accessible to 
unauthorised persons.   
l. Some files or registers 
containing personal data are not 
kept in a confidential form and 
place and are accessible to 
unauthorised person s.  
m. A data subject who inputs his or 
her personal data on a register or 
file may see the personal data of 
other data subjects.   
n. Reasonable measures have been 
taken to ensure that a data 
subject who inputs his or her 
personal data on a register or                                       
  
          
71 
  
 
file cannot see the personal data 
of other data subjects.  
o. Digital devices such as 
computers used for data 
processing have acces s 
controls.   
p. At least one of the digital 
devices used for data processing 
does not have access control.   
2(B) 
 
 
 DATA ACCESS 
CONTROL  
 
Please select from the 
list “types of answers ” 
column, the type of 
facts that describe the 
organisation ’s practices 
in respect of data access 
control in order to 
guarantee data 
Confidentiality, 
Integrity and 
Availability within the 
organisation.  S.39 
Art.30    a. User Specific or Personalised 
Password   
b. 2 factor Authentication   
c. Multi -factor Authentication   
d. Encryption of data at rest   
e. Encryption of data in transit   
f. Anti- Ransomware   
g. Anti-Spyware   
h. Anti-Malware   
i. Locational Security   
 
2(C)  
 
 
 
 
 
 DATA ACCESS 
CONTROL AND 
BUSINESS 
CONTINUITY  
 
Please select from the 
list “types of answers ” 
column, the type of 
facts that describe the 
organisation ’s practices 
in respect of data access 
control in order to 
guarantee data 
Confidentiality, 
Integrity and 
Availability within the 
organisation.  
 S.39 
Art.30   a. All the access controls are 
adequate  in relation to risks of 
breaches.   
b. At least one  of the controls may 
not be very strong or adequate 
in relation to risk of breaches.   
c. The organisation  has a schedule 
for Monitoring, Evaluation and 
Maintenance (MEM) of its data 
security system   
d. The Schedule for MEM data 
security was vetted by a 
certified data security expert  in 
accordance with NDP ACT 
GAID.   
e. The organisation  does not have 
a schedule for MEM of its data 
security system vetted by a duly 
certified data security expert.   
f. The organisation has a disaster 
recovery plan.                                        
  
          
72 
  
 
g. The organisation does not have 
a disaster recovery plan.   
h. The disaster recovery plan is 
POOR  because some crucial 
data may not be recovered.   
i. The disaster recovery plan is 
FAIR  because crucial data will 
be recovered but it may take a 
long time.   
     j. The disaster recovery plan is 
GOOD  because ALL DATA  
will be recovered but it may 
take a long time.   
     k. The disaster recovery plan is 
EXCELLENT because  ALL 
DATA  will be recovered 
ALMOST IMMEDIATELY – 
with the least possible latency.   
2(D)  
 
 
 
 
 DATA SECURITY  
 
Please select from the 
list “types of answers ” 
column , the type of 
facts that describe the 
organisation ’s practices 
in respect of data 
security to guarantee 
data Confidentiality 
Integrity and 
Availability.  S.39   a. Poor  – on the ground that 
critical security measures are 
non-existent or not up to date.   
b. Average  – the level of data 
security measure in place may 
offer basic protection to 
sensitive and non -sensitive 
personal data, importantly, the 
possibility of a breach which 
may create harm or compromise 
the privacy to data subjects is 
low.  
c. Above Average  – critical 
security measures are in place 
but may be vulnerable because 
some controls that are crucial 
for the security of sensitive 
personal data or financial data 
are not in place or not adequate.   
d. Close to Industry Grade  – 
Critical security measures and 
controls are in place but falls 
below recognised global 
standards or more specifically, 
they do not follow any one of 
the following standards:   
i. 
 ISO 27000 series . 
                                       
  
          
73 
  
 
 
ii. 
 
 
 
iii. 
 
 
iv. 
 
 
v. National Institute of Standards 
and Technology Special 
Publications (NIST SP) 800 -
series .  
NIST Cyber  Security 
Framework CSF . 
  
Center for Internet Security 
(CIS) Critical Security 
Controls . 
 
COBIT .  
vi. Health Information Trust  Alliance 
(HITRUST) Common Security 
Framework (CSF) .  
e. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
i. 
 
ii. 
 
iii. 
 
 
iv. 
v. 
 
vi. 
 
 
vii 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Industry Grade – adequate 
technical and organisational 
measures are in place managed 
by qualified experts who are 
certified in accordance with 
recognised global standards. 
More specifically, the 
organisation implements the 
following standards:   
ISO 27000 series .  
National Institute of Standards and 
Technology Special Publications 
(NIST SP) 800 -series . 
NIST Cyber  Security 
Framework CSF . 
Center for Internet Security (CIS) 
Critical Security Controls . 
COBIT . 
Health Information Trust Alliance 
(HITRUST) Common Security 
Framework (CSF) . 
The Organisation is also on the 
National Data Protection 
Adequacy Programme 
Whitelist.                                        
  
          
74 
  
 
      
 
PART 3 : ACCOUNTABILITY AND BASIC RISK EV ALUATION  
3(A)  
 
 
 
1. 
 DATA PRIVACY 
IMPACT 
ASSESSMENT  
 
At the commencement 
of operation as an 
organisation or in the 
course of operation, did 
the organisation ever 
carry out a Data Privacy 
Impact Assessment 
(DPIA)?  
 S.28  
Art.29  Yes No  
2. Did the organisation  
deploy a new 
technology or introduce 
new measures of data 
processing within the 
last year?  S.28  
Art.29  Yes No  
3. Did the organisation 
take into consideration 
the NDP Act in the 
specification, design 
and testing of the new 
technology?  S.28  
Art.29  Yes No  
4. From the list in “types 
of answers ” column, 
choose the type of facts 
that describe the 
organisation ’s 
consideration on DPIA.  S.28  
Art.29    a. The organi sation is not processing 
sensitive personal data . 
b. The organi sation  processes or intends 
to process sensitive personal data . 
c. At least some of data subjects being 
targeted by the data processing fall 
within the risk factors under the Data 
Subjects ’ Vulnerability Index . 
d. Data subjects being targeted by the 
data processing do not  fall within the 
risk factors under the Data Subjects ’ 
Vulnerability Index . 
e. New technology or procedures have 
been deployed that may significantly 
impact the privacy of data subjects . 
f. No new technology or procedures 
have been deployed that may                                      
  
          
75 
  
 
significantly impact the privacy of 
data subjects . 
  
3(B) 
 
 
 
 
 LEGITIMATE 
INTEREST 
ASSESSMENT  
 
Does the organisation 
rely on legitimate 
interest to process 
personal data?  
 S.25 
(1)(b)  
(v) 
 Yes No  
1. Does the organisation 
carry out legitimate 
interest assessment?   Yes No  
2. Please select from the 
list “types of answers ” 
column, the type of 
facts that describe the 
organisation ’s practices 
in respect of legitimate 
interest.      a The organisation  relies on 
legitimate interest to foster some 
of its business interests and this 
business interests are not, in 
some cases, connected to 
security of lives and crime 
prevention, sustainability of 
Health, Safety and Environment.    
b Legitimate interest is only relied 
upon as a lawful basis when the 
rights of data subjects are 
considered and it is EVIDENT 
that the legitimate interest does 
not override the rights of the data 
subject.   
c Legitimate interest is relied upon 
only in circumstances that are 
necessary and relevant to the 
fulfilment of data processing 
which already has another lawful 
basis. E.g. in circumstances of 
security of lives and crime 
prevention, sustainability of 
Health, Safety and Environment.   
3(C)  
 
 
 
 
1. ACCOUNTABILITY 
AND RECORD OF 
PROCESSING 
ACTIVITIES  
 
Does the DPO prepare 
Semi -Annual Data Art. 13 Yes No                                       
  
          
76 
  
 
Protection Report 
(SAPR) as provided for 
under the NDP ACT 
GAID?  
 
2. Please select  from the 
list “types of answers ” 
column, the type of 
facts that describe the 
organisation ’s practices 
in respect of 
accountability and 
record of processing 
activities.   Art. 13   a. The (SAPR) is an accurate, 
evidence -based assessment of 
the organisation ’s data security 
based on Art.14 of the GAID.   
b. The organisation processed 
personal data of at least ----------
-----------------  data subjects in 
the last 3 months.   
c. The organisation  has lawful 
basis recognized by the NDP Act 
to process personal data.   
d. In instances where the 
organisation is not sure of its 
lawful basis, it sought guidance 
from a DPCO or the NDPC.   
e. The DPCO provided guidance 
on the appropriate lawful basis.    
f. The DPCO DID NOT provide 
guidance on the appropriate 
lawful basis.   
g. The organisation complies with 
the Nigeria Data Protection Act, 
and other regulatory instruments 
issued by NDPC.   
h. There are ---------------------------
---------------  complaints by data 
subjects (or Not Applicable).   
i. -------------------------------  
complaints are under 
investigation (or Not 
Applicable).   
j. --------------------------------
complaints are resolved within --
------------ days (or Not 
Applicable).   
k. --------------------------------  
compliance notices were issued 
by the NDPC to the organization 
(or Not Applicable).   
l. --------------------------------  of the 
compliance notices have been                                       
  
          
77 
  
 
resolved within ----------- days. 
(or Not Applicable).  
m. ---------------------------  of Data 
Subject ’s Access Requests 
(DSAR) were received by the 
organisation.  (or Not 
Applicable).   
n. ----------------------------  of 
DSAR are receiving attention? 
(or Not Applicable).   
o. ----------------------------  of 
DSAR were resolved with Data 
Subjects within -----------  days 
(or Not Applicable).   
p. There are --------------------
number of breaches (or Not 
Applicable).   
q. Breach notification was sent to 
the NDPC within 72 hours. (or 
Not Applicable).   
r. Breach notification was sent to 
the data subjects immediately. 
(or Not Applicable).   
      
3. Does the DPO submit 
their report directly to 
the management at least 
once in six (6) months?  
 Art.13
(2) Yes No  
4. Is the report submitted 
by the DPO 
acknowledged as 
provided under NDP 
ACT -GAID?  
 Art.13
(3) Yes No  
5. Is the acknowledgement 
of report submission 
verified by a Data 
Protection Compliance 
Organisation as 
provided under NDP 
ACT -GAID?  
 Art.13
(4) Yes No  
  
 
                                          
  
          
78 
  
 
 
 
PART 4 : CROSS -BORDER  DATA TRANSFER  
 
1.  
Does the organisation 
engage in cross -border 
data transfer?  
 Ss.41 -
43 Yes No  
2. In the list of “Types of 
Answers ,” pick the type 
of personal data the 
organisations transfer  
outside Nigeria .   a. 
 
b. Sensitive Personal Data . 
 
None Sensitive Personal Data . 
3. Please select from the 
list “types of answers ” 
column, the legal 
grounds upon which the 
organisation conducts 
cross -border  data 
transfer (if any).      a. Adequacy decision of the 
Commission in respect of the 
destination of the personal data.   
b. Cross -border transfer instrument 
approved by the Commission.   
c. Fiduciary or Jural grounds in 
anyone of the applicable 
circumstances below:   
i. Data subject has provided and 
not withdrawn consent to such 
transfer after having been 
informed of the possible risks of 
such transfers for the data  subject 
due to the absence of adequate 
protections.   
ii. Transfer is necessary for the 
performance of a contract to 
which a data subject is a party or 
in order to take steps at the 
request of a data subject, prior to 
entering into a contract.   
iii. Transfer is for the sole benefit of 
a data subject and — it is not 
reasonably practicable to obtain 
the consent of the data subject to 
that transfer, and if it were 
reasonably practicable to obtain 
such consent, the data subject 
would likely give it.   
iv. Transfer is necessary for 
important reasons of public 
interest.                                        
  
          
79 
  
 
v. Transfer is necessary for the 
establishment, exercise, or 
defense of legal claims.   
vi. Transfer is necessary to protect 
the vital interests of a data 
subject or of  other persons, 
where a data subject is physically 
or legally incapable of giving 
consent.   
4. Are cross -border  data 
transfers documented 
and assessed for 
compliance?   
 
YES/NO    
5. Which countries are 
these transfers made to?      Select Countries .  
PART 5: DATA PROCESSORS  
  
1. Does your organisation 
use data processors in 
carrying out its 
activities?  S.29 Yes No  (If yes, questions in this section 
pop up; if no, skip to the next 
section) .  
2. Is there a written 
contract between your 
organisation  and the 
processors?  S.29 
(2) Yes No    
3. Please select from the 
list “types of answers ” 
column, choose the type 
of facts that describe 
your organisations due 
diligence in engaging 
data processors.      
a. 
 
b. 
 
c. 
 
 
 
d. 
 
 
e. 
 
 
f. 
 
 
g. 
 
 The organisation:   
Implements Data Processing 
Agreement . 
Monitors ongoing compliance . 
 
Confirms the Processor is duly 
registered with NDPC as a data 
controller or processor of major 
importance.  
Obtains evidence of 
Certifications or Standards . 
 
Secures methods of storage or 
transfer of data . 
 
Ensures Involvement of 
Processor in the DPIA process . 
 
Implements Clear Incident 
Response protocols . 
                                      
  
          
80 
  
 
 
      Confirms compliance of sub -
processor (where applicable) 
with obtaining proof of 
compliance from the processor 
regarding the sub -processor.  
  
4. Please select from the 
list “types of answers ” 
column, choose the type 
of facts that describe 
your organisations due 
diligence after 
termination of data 
processing agreement      
 
a. 
 
b. 
 
c. 
 
d. 
 
e. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The organisation ensures:   
Data deletion (with confirmation 
of deletion) . 
Data Return . 
 
Anonymisation of data . 
 
Audit records (assessed by your 
organisation . 
Revocation of access to systems  
and data . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                      
  
          
81 
  
 
 
 
 
SCHEDULE 3  
DATA PROTECTION OFFICER ’S ASSESSMENT  
SN METRIC  MARKS  
1 Confirmation that the issuing body is an educational body approved or 
accredited by a competent regulator of educational services.  
 15  
2 Confirmation that the training leading to the award of the certificate is up 
to 40 hours.  
 15 
3 Confirmation that an examination was conducted as a condition 
precedent to the award of the certificate.  20 
4 Confirmation that the DPO is enrolled on the da tabase of the 
Commission.  10 
5 Cumulative Score for Continuous Professional Development (CP D) 
Yearly (At least active participation in 4 different progammes recognised 
by the Commission) . 40 
 TOTAL  100 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                     
  
          
82 
  
 
 
SCHEDULE 4  
DATA PRIV ACY IMPACT ASSESSMENT TEMPLATE  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 S/N                                              GENERAL BACKGROUND  
 WHAT TO NOTE  MATERIAL INFORMATION  
Highlight the central work of 
the organisation, for 
processing of personal data 
and the major reasons for 
carrying out a DPIA.   
                                                             ASSESSMENT  
State in the column below whether or not the information available is adequate. Provide 
succinct and cogent reasons for your assessment. Provide ratio (on the scale of 1 to 10) in 
relation to what is reasonably required. E.g. if lack of material information on purpose 
limitation should make the processing score low in this particular metric on the scale of 1 
to 10.  
 
 
 
 
RATIO (If applicable)  
                                     
  
          
83 
  
 
S/N                     NATURE OF ENVISAGED (OR ONGOING) PROCESSING:  
 Will data be processed 
automatically (e.g . by 
software) or manually (e.g . by 
people)?   
 What specific areas or types of 
data will be processed (e.g . 
customer data, employee 
data)?  
  
 Who will this data be about 
(e.g. all customers, specific 
employee groups)?  
  
 Is there a risk of the 
processing exceeding this 
intended scope?  
 
  
 Will any third -party 
companies be involved in 
processing the data?  
  
 Will this processing involve 
sending data to other 
countries (cross -border 
transfers)?   
 If data is transferred, what 
legal justification exists (e.g . 
contractual safeguard)?  
  
 Considering the processing 
method and data types, what 
are the potential risks to data 
subjects (e.g . unauthorised 
access, discrimination)?  
 
  
 What specific types of data 
will be processed (e.g ., names, 
email addresses, financial 
data)?  
  
 How many people will be 
affected by this data                                       
  
          
84 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 processing (estimated 
number)?  
 
 Y ou can reference similar 
situations if there are no 
existing numbers.  
  
                                                     ASSESSMENT  
State in the column below whether or not the information available is adequate. Provide 
succinct and cogent reasons for your assessment. Provide ratio (on the scale of 1  to10) in 
relation to what is reasonably required. E.g. lack of material information on purpose 
limitation should make the processing score low on the scale of 1 to 10. E.g. lack of 
information on the capabilities or the pro cessing medium in terms of collection of data, 
storage, access to data points or personal data files should make the processing score low 
in this particular metric on the scale of 1 to 10.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
RATIO (If applicable)                                       
  
          
85 
  
 
 
 
 S/N THE LAWFUL BASIS AND  CONTEXT OF PROCESSING  
 WHAT TO NOTE  MATERIAL INFORMATION  
State the lawful basis for 
processing personal data 
such as consent, legal 
obligation, vital interest, 
legitimate interest and public 
interest. Give reasons for 
choosing your lawful basis 
for the processing.  
 
Additional information as to 
any prior relationship with 
the data subject will be 
helpful. Describe the class of 
data subjects targeted by the 
processing.   
  
                                                             ASSESSMENT  
State in the column be low whether or not the information available is adequate. Provide 
succinct and cogent reasons for your assessment. Provide ratio (on the scale of 1 to 10) 
in relation to what is reasonably required. E.g. lack of clear lawful basis and description 
of data s ubjects should make the processing score low in this particular metric on the 
scale of 1 to 10.  
 
 
 
 
RATIO (If applicable)                                       
  
          
86 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 S/N NECESSITY AND PROPORTIONALITY:  
 WHAT TO NOTE  MATERIAL INFORMATION  
Explain why the chosen 
processing method is 
essential  for achieving the 
legal reason you have for 
using the data.   
Briefly explain how it 
directly helps you achieve 
your goal.   
Describe how you will keep 
data secure and respect 
people ’s privacy while 
processing it.   
Mention practices common 
in democratic societies for 
data protection.  
  
Briefly state if you 
considered alternative 
methods.  
  
Explain why these other 
methods would not be 
effective in achieving your 
legal purpose.  
  
  
                                                             ASSESSMENT  
State in the column below whether or not the information available is adequate. Provide 
succinct and cogent reasons for your assessment. Provide ratio (on the scale of 1 to 10) 
in relation to what is reasonably required. E.g. lack of clear lawful basis and description 
of data subjects should make the processing score low in this particular metric on the 
scale of 1 to 10.  
 
 
 
 
RATIO (If applicable)                                       
  
          
87 
  
 
 
 
 S/N CONSULTATION OF STAKEHOLDERS:  
 WHAT TO NOTE  MATERIAL INFORMATION  
Who are the stakeholders? 
The data subjects, Nigeria 
Data Protection Commission 
and the internal managers of 
the data processing (e.g . the 
Management level decision 
makers, Chief Information 
Security Officers, Data 
Protection Officers and users 
of the data processing 
medium).  
 
Y ou may rely on surveys, 
carry out assessment, review 
instructions from Original 
Equipment Manufacturers 
and where necessary interact 
with them. Seek information 
on what can make  the 
medium function optimally 
or malfunction. Seek 
information as to data 
Confidentiality, Integrity and 
Availability.  
  
                                                             ASSESSMENT  
State in the column below whether or not the information available is adequate. Provide 
succinct and cogent reasons for your assessment. Provide ratio (on the scale of 1 to 10) 
in relation to what is reasonably required. E.g. lack of rigorous consultation on the 
Confidentiality, Integrity and Availability of data should make the processing score low 
in this particular metric on the scale of 1 to 10.  
 
 
 
 
RATIO (If applicable)                                       
  
          
88 
  
 
S/N IDENTIFIED/POTENTIAL VULNERABILITIES  
 WHAT TO NOTE  MATERIAL INFORMATION  
Account for every possible 
risk including but not limited 
to possible inadvertence on 
the part of data subjects. 
State the risks to Data 
Confidentiality, Integrity and 
Availability.  
 
State the Data Subjects ’ 
Vulnerability Indexes (DSVI) 
under  the NDP ACT -GAID 
that may apply in the 
processing.  
 
Examine efficiency or 
promptness in remediation 
process for data subjects and 
disaster recovery. Efficiency 
may be measured by the time 
it takes a complaint to be 
resolved, the satisfaction of 
the data s ubject and 
usefulness of the resolution 
taking into consideration the 
urgency of the complaint at 
the material time.  
 
Examine the technical 
capacity of persons involved 
in data processing - whether 
they are conversant with 
technical and organisational 
meas ures for data protection 
that are relevant to the level of 
their involvement.  
 
 E.g. data rectification or data 
subject access request 
towards: admission into 
university, travelling, seeking 
medical service or preventing 
fraud or alleviating 
deprivation sh ould be 
addressed urgently.  A 
resolution which fails to                                       
  
          
89 
  
 
address the urgency in cases 
such as the above lacks merit.  
                                                             ASSESSMENT  
State in the column below whether or not the information available is adequate. Provide 
succinct and cogent reasons for your assessment. Provide ratio (on the scale of 1 to 10) 
in relation to what is reasonably required.  Deficiency in the principles of da ta privacy 
and protection or lack of prompt remediation of data subjects ’ complaints or resilient 
disaster recovery plan should be treated as high vulnerability.  This should make the 
processing score very low  in this particular metric on the scale of 1 to  10. 
 
 
 
 
RATIO (If applicable)  
 Choose the fact that approximates to your assessment of risk  
NOTE:  Under NDP Act -GAID Ultimate or decisive credential means 
any information such as a password or a token. Once provided, it 
completes a transaction such as opening an email account, access to 
bank account or access to secure records.  
Degree of 
Risk and 
Potential 
Harm to Data 
Subjects -
taking into 
consideration 
the protocols 
to be 
followed in 
the 
processing.  REMOTE  – because personally identifiable information is: lawfully in 
the public domain/it is limited to nominal contact information (name, 
phone number and email address)/contains no sensitive personal data/ 
adequate measures have been put in place to guarantee its 
Confidentiality, Integrity and Availability and it contains no decisive or 
ultimate credential for authenticating valuable transactions.  Mark here 
if this is your choice   
 
Give succinct and cogent reasons for your choice:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                       
  
          
90 
  
 
POSSIBLE  - it contains decisive or ultimate credential for 
authenticating valuable transactions. PII may be accessed through extra -
ordinary measures. Extra -Ordinary measures are measures that are 
beyond the state of the art or contained in directives given  under public 
interest to address a clear and present danger or measures given under 
vital interest of a data subject or a third party.  Mark here if this is your 
choice:  
Give succinct and cogent reasons  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PROBABLE  - because it involves covert or over access to personally 
identifiable information. May or may not contain decisive or ultimate 
credential for authenticating valuable transactions. PII may be accessed 
through simple or complex measures. Simple or complex measures are 
measures that are available through existing software or through 
directives that are issued under a routine legal obligation.  
Mark here if this is your choice:  
Give succinct and cogent reasons for your choice:  
 
 Severity  
of harm  Choose  the fact that approximates to your assessment of harm to data 
subjects . 
 
 MARGINAL OR LOW – because the data processing does not involve 
sensitive personal data. The processing may not create any avenue 
through which the data subject may lose his or her life or livelihoods. 
Mark here if this is your choice:    
Give succinct and cogent reasons for your choice:  
 
 
  
 
                                      
  
          
91 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
SIGNIFICANT OR MODERATE – because the data processing 
involves sensitive personal data or the processing may create avenue 
through which the data subject may lose some marginal fraction of his  
or her valuables. Mark here if this is your choice:    
Give succinct and cogent reasons for your choice:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GRAVE OR EXTREME OR ENORMOUS  - because the data 
processing involves sensitive personal data, ultimate or decisive 
credentials.  The processing may create an avenue through which the data 
subject may lose her life, all or substantial part of  his or her livelihood. 
Mark here if this is your choice:  
Give succinct and cogent reasons for your choice:   
                                      
  
          
92 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 POTENTIAL DISPARATE OUTCOMES:  
WHAT TO NOTE  MATERIAL INFORMATION  
 
Consider how data 
processing might intersect 
with other rights, 
particularly the right to 
human dignity. How can 
you mitigate risks to these 
rights?  
 
For example, a survey of 
disadvantaged group for a 
good cause (e.g . free 
healthcare) could still lead 
to further stigmatisation if 
the data is handled by 
people with little sympathy 
or data security is not 
adequate.  
 
Cameras used for security 
can also limit people ’s 
privacy, for example, the 
use of CCTV . These  are 
deployed for security; 
however, this may infringe 
on the right to privacy or 
inhibit freedom of 
expression.  
  
                                                             ASSESSMENT  
State in the column below whether or not the information available  is adequate. Provide 
succinct and cogent reasons for your assessment. Provide ratio (on the scale of 1 to 10) 
in relation to what is reasonably required. E.g. if lack of material information on the 
intersection of the processing with other fundamental rig hts and freedoms that are closely 
associated with the processing should make the processing score low in this particular 
metric on the scale of 1 to 10.  
 
 
 
 
RATIO (If applicable)                                       
  
          
93 
  
 
S/N                                              CROSS -BORDER DATA TRANSFER  
 WHAT TO NOTE  MATERIAL INFORMATION  
 
Will Data Be Transferred 
Outside Nigeria?  
  
If yes, specify the countries 
where the data may be 
transferred.  
  
Indicate the legal 
justification for transferring 
data under Sections 41 -42 of 
the NDP Act (e.g . consent, 
adequacy decisions by the 
NDPC).  
  
If transferring to a country in 
respect of which the 
Commission has not made 
an adequacy  decision.  
 
Briefly describe the legal 
and technical safeguards in 
place to protect human rights 
in those countries, 
considering relevant 
international instruments 
like the United Nations 
Universal Declaration of 
Human Rights and relevant 
international covenants.  
 
  
Mention if non -citizens have 
the same data protection 
rights as citizens in those 
countries.  
  
Indicate if there are 
documented instances of 
systemic discrimination 
against vulnerable groups.   
 
 
                                       
  
          
94 
  
 
Additional Applicable 
Laws   
 
List any other relevant data 
protection laws or 
regulations that apply to the 
transfer, such as the 
ECOWAS Supplementary 
Act, African Union 
Convention, or the GDPR (if 
applicable).  
Data Subject Grievance  
Redress  
 
Describe the specific 
mechanisms for data 
subjects to address any 
grievances related to data 
transfer ( e.g. complaints, 
procedures) . 
  
Data Sovereignty 
Considerations  
 
Explain the effectiveness of 
data sovereignty principles 
(keeping data within 
Nigeria) in this specific case. 
Consider if the data 
processing is for public 
service or inhere ntly 
governmental function.  
State if (i) The processing may 
adversely impact national 
norms/initiatives on: Unity, 
Faith, Peace and  Progress  (ii) 
Loss of access to sovereign or 
public data for public good may 
undermine performance of 
government functions that are 
data driven.  E.g. for security, 
economic and democratic 
development (iii) Data subjects 
may not be able to obtain 
immediate and effective 
remedy for violation of their 
data subjects rights in                                       
  
          
95 
  
 
 
 
 jurisdictions where  their data 
may be processed.   
For guidance on public good 
and national norms see 
Fundamental Objectives and 
Directive Principles of State 
Policy, Chapter II of the 
Constitution of the Federal 
Republic of Nigeria, 1999.  
 
Data Security Risks  
 
Assess any potential risks of 
data breaches i n the transfer 
jurisdictions, considering 
actions by state or non -state 
actors.  
  
  
                                                             ASSESSMENT  
State in the column below whether or not the information available is adequate. Provide 
succinct and cogent reasons for your assessment. Provide ratio (on the scale of 1 to 10) 
in relation to what is reasonably required. E.g. lack of material information on the 
enjoyment of fundamental freedoms in line with international bill of rights should  make 
the processing score low in this particular metric on the scale of 1 to 10.  
 
 
 
 
RATIO (If applicable)                                       
  
          
96 
  
 
S/N GENERAL EV ALUATION OF THE INTERPLAY OF DATA PROCESSING, 
PRINCIPLES OF DATA PROTECTION AND DATA SUBJECTS ’ RIGHTS  
 WHAT TO NOTE  MATERIAL INFORMATION  
Itemise the principles of data 
protection and data subjects ’ 
rights.  
 
State succinctly the 
operation of each of the 
principles and rights in the 
data processing under 
assessment.  
 
E.g. The need for 
Lawfulness, Fairness and 
Transparency in data 
processing : There is a clear 
legal ground identified in the 
processing, the data subjects 
are not prejudiced and the 
material information 
relating to processing are 
given before, during and 
after processing to data 
subjects. Where a procedure 
of data processing does not 
mandate the giving of 
information to data subjects 
for overriding security 
reasons or in other 
circumstances where lawful 
derogation is permitted, the 
processing is still subject to 
statutory guidance or review 
by NDPC or to judicial 
proceedings . 
 
It is important to state 
whether or not the data 
controller or data processor 
is accountable to NDPC by 
way of registration and by 
filing annual NDP Act 
Compliance Audit Returns.   
                                                             ASSESSMENT                                       
  
          
97 
  
 
 
 
 
 State in the column below whether or not the information available is adequate. Provide 
succinct and cogent reasons for your assessment. Provide ratio (on the scale of 1 to 10) 
in relation to what is reasonably required, e.g. lack of material i nformation on how 
EACH  of the principles and rights operates within the context of the processing should 
make the processing score low in this particular metric on the scale of 1 to 10.  
 
 
 
 
RATIO (If applicable)                                       
  
          
98 
  
 
S/N            RECOMMENDATIONS FOR MITIGATION OF IDENTIFIED RISKS  
 WHAT TO NOTE  MATERIAL INFORMATION  
Risks  
 
List all the potential 
problems identified during 
the DPIA related to data 
privacy ( e.g. data breaches, 
unauthorised access.  
  
Mitigating Risks (Minimum 
Necessary)  
 
For each risk, explain the 
simplest and most effective 
technical and 
organisational method you 
will take to reduce the risk 
(e.g. strong passwords, 
access controls)  
  
Insurance and Liability   
 
While insurance might help 
with some issues, it does not 
replace your responsibility 
for protecting data.   
Commitment to Fixing 
Problems  
 
If the measures in point 2, 
do not completely eliminate 
the risk, explain how you 
will address any problems 
that c an still occur (e.g ., 
containment measures, 
indemnity notifying 
affected individuals) . 
  
Sandboxes (Optional)  
 
Evaluate if using a 
“sandbox ” (a simulated 
environment) to test the 
data processing activity                                       
  
          
99 
  
 
before full implementation 
would be beneficial.  
 
                                                             ASSESSMENT  
State in the column below whether or not the information available in all the steps above 
is adequate. Provide succinct and cogent reasons for your assessment. Provide ratio (on 
the scale of 1 to 10) in relation to what is reasonably required, e.g. if lack of material 
information on purpose limitation should make the processing score low in this particular 
metric on the scale of 1 to 10.  
 
 
 
 
RATIO (If applicable)  
  
 FINAL ASSESSMENT:   Select the facts that best align with your assessment  
GO AHEAD : Data Processing may be carried out because the risk is remote and the 
recommendations are adequate in addressing the risks in the unlikely event of their 
occurrence. This as sessment particularly takes into account the concrete evidence of 
necessity and proportionality of the processing, the high degree of enjoyment of data 
subject rights, data subjects may reasonably expect that their personal data may be 
processed under the lawful basis recognised by the NDP Act. Mark here if this is your 
choice:  
 
 
MODIFY DATA PROCESSING : Data Processing may be carried out subject to 
fundamental modifications as recommended in the DPIA.  This assessment particularly 
takes into account the concrete evidence of necessity and proportionality of the 
processing and the high degree of enjoyment of data subject rights.  Any derogation falls 
within the scope permitted under the 1999 Constitution of the Federal Republic of 
Nigeria or the re are no derogations because the data subjects may reasonably expect that 
their personal data may be processed under the lawful basis recognised by the NDP Act.  
Mark here if this is your choice:  
 
 
STOP DATA PROCESSING: Data Processing should be stopp ed on the ground that 
the general nature of the processing appears to be unnecessary and disproportionate. The 
derogations may fall outside the scope permitted under 1999 Constitution of the Federal 
Republic of Nigeria.  This assessment also takes into con sideration other less intrusive 
methods of data processing, inherent risks and disparate outcomes of the processing.   
Mark here if this is your choice:  
 
FREQUENCY OF REVIEW : State how frequently the DPIA should be reviewed 
and give succinct and cogent reasons for your choice .  
 
                                      
  
          
100 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Monthly -------------------------            
 
Bi-Monthly -----------------------   
 
Quarterly -----------------------  
 
2 Times in a Year -------------               
 
Annually -------------------------   
 
Once in 2 Years --------------  
 
Once in the lifecycle of  
the Data Processing ----------  
GIVE COGENT AND SUCCINCT REASONS FOR YOUR CHOICE  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
                                      
  
          
101 
  
 
 
 
 
 
SCHEDULE 5  
GUIDANCE ON CROSS -BORDER DATA TRANSFER  
 
1. There are various grounds for data transfer, namely:  
a) Adequacy Decision by the Commission;  
b) Cross -Border Data Transfer Instrument (CBDTI) approved by the Commission; and  
c) Other lawful bases.  
2. The Commission may adjudge a country as affording adequate data protection based on the 
following conditions:  
a) Availability of enforceable data subject rights, the ability of a data subject to enforce such 
rights through administrative or judicial redress,  and the rule of law; (S.42(2)(a) of the 
NDP Act).  This means : 
i. The data subjects ’ rights in the jurisdiction to be considered as affording adequate data 
protection are recognised in a legislation or a subsidiary legislation.  
ii. Data subjects in the said juri sdiction are not under any barrier whether economic, 
social or political in enforcing their rights in a forum duly constituted or recogni sed in 
law, and are reasonably accessible to data subjects without undue constraints.  
iii. The judicial or administrative pl atform or forum for redress operates in accordance 
with principles of impartiality, equality, independence and respect for human rights.  
b) Existence of any appropriate instrument between the Commission and a competent 
authority in the recipient jurisdiction that ensures adequate data protection.  (S.42(2)(a) of 
the NDP Act). This means the Commission may enter into an agreement with the Data 
Protection Authority of the jurisdiction for the purposes of Mutual Legal Assistance on:  
i. Investigation of data breaches . 
ii. Enforcement of cross -border decision.  
iii. Intergovernmental information sharing.  
c) Access of a public authority to personal data; (S.42(2)(c) of the NDP Act). This means: 
Scrutiny of mode of access by public authority to personal data where this is a derogati on 
from privacy right and taking into account : 
i. The degree of derogation or margin of appreciation permitted by law;  
ii. The necessity of the access to personal data;  
iii. The proportionality of the method employed for data processing;  
iv. The frequency of access to personal data; and  
v. The opportunity of redress by an aggrieved person and the safeguards for fair 
hearing.  
                                     
  
          
102 
  
 
d) Existence of an effective data protection law.  (S.42(2)( d) of the NDP Act). This means an 
Act of Parliament : 
i. Which is in force, and  
ii. It is not subject  to any overriding law,  
iii. Not likely to be repealed by an Administrative Act or amended to suit light and 
transient causes, and  
iv. Amenable to only laws which seek the protection of larger freedoms as recognised 
by the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 194 8 and relevant customary 
principles of international law.  
 
e) Existence and functioning of an independent, competent data protection, or similar 
supervisory authority with adequate enforcement powers.  (S.42(2)(e) of the NDP Act). 
This means : 
i. An executive bod y established by the instrumentality of the Sovereign Authority 
within a sovereign nation – taking into account the efficacy of enforcement of 
executive decisions in the sovereign nation without any need for a higher power 
except the courts. In this regard , sub-national  authorities do not enjoy independent 
sovereign powers that may enable them to effectively determine safeguards for data 
flows a cross  border s. Accordingly, sub-national  authorities shall not be considered 
by the Commission as bodies that are legally empowered to act independently in 
order to guarantee national adequacy of data protection.    
ii. An administrative body under an establishment of a sovereign authority may be 
considered as an independent authority for the purpose Section 42(2)(a) of th e NDP 
Act provided that its decisions on the enforcement of data subject rights are subject 
to appeal or adjudicatory reviews by courts of competent jurisdiction only.  
f) International commitments and conventions binding on the relevant country and its 
membe rship of any multilateral or regional organisations.  (Section 42(2)(f) of the NDP 
Act). This means the Commission shall consider the international commitments which:  
i. May impact data flows within and a cross  border s – taking into account the 
possibility of data flows to countries without adequate data protection safeguards;  
ii. Impact the enforcement of data subjects ’ rights; and  
iii. Generally, impact the efficacy of bilateral agreement with the country being 
considered for adequacy decision.  
3. The Commission may app rove CBDTI for a data controller or data processor or a group 
of data controller and processors in the absence of an adequacy decision. These 
instruments may be referred to as:  
a) codes of conduct,  
b) certifications,  
c) binding corporate rules, or  
d) standard contractual clauses.                                       
  
          
103 
  
 
4. The objective of the CBDTI is to ensure:  
a) Proper monitoring of data flows and accountability between or among the parties 
concerned ; 
b) Access to remedy on the part of the data subjects concerned ; and  
c) Data Sovereignty .   
5. The Commission may  consider the outcome of NDP Act Compliance in Audit carried 
out by a DPCO in respect of a data controller or a data processor seeking approval of a 
CBDTI before granting approval of same. Similarly, evidence of adherence to global 
best practice or reputable standards by the data controller or processor shall also be 
taken into account.  
6. (a) The NDP Act recogni ses special circumstances which may necessitate cross -border 
data transfer without adequacy decision or approved CBDTI. These special 
circumsta nces are covered by Jural or Fiduciary Obligations.   
(b) A data transfer may be referred to as jural when it is founded on a compelling legal 
right or duty of the data controller or data processor.  
(c) A compelling legal right is different from a busines s interest. Profit and personal 
business/organi sational development considerations do not fall within this category of 
a compelling legal right or duty.   
(d) Other lawful bases recogni sed under the NDP Act are: -   
i. Defence or establishment of a legal clai m; 
ii. Vital Interest of another data subject where the data subject is physically or 
legally impossible to give consent ; and  
iii. Public interest .  
iv. The data subject concerned has given and has not withdrawn consent.  
v. The risks must be properly communicated and there must be a clear 
indication that the data subject understands the risks involved.  
vi. There is a contract involving the data subject as a party.  
vii. If the contract is under negotiation, an agreement in principle will suffice. 
This agreement in principle may  be by series of affirmative actions from 
which a reasonable inference of constructive consent may be drawn. The 
amount of data must also be limited to that which is necessary for 
identification purposes in the envisaged contract.  
viii. The purpose of the transf er is for the sole benefit of the data subject. An 
inference will be drawn from prior relationship between the data subject and 
the data controller or data processor. It must be that the data subject would 
have given consent. The prudential safeguards are that:  
1. The organisation itself is known for carrying out charitable acts for 
the benefit of others.  
2. The benefits are vital to the welfare of the data subject . 
                                      
  
          
104 
  
 
                                
SCHEDULE 6  
DATA SUBJECT ’s VULNERABILITY INDEXES (DSVI)  
 
i. A data controller or data processor shall take into consideration data subject ’s vulnerability index 
with a view to developing and implementing adequate technical and organisational measures.  
ii. A data subject ’s vulnerability index is a risk factor which may be peculiar to a data subject, a 
group or a class of data subject, which, if not particularly considered, may lead to unfair 
processing or a breach of duty of care in data processing.  
iii. The DSVI to be considered by a data controller or a data processor before a nd during data 
processing include, but are not limited to the following:  
(a) Age – being too old or being a minor . 
(b) Health . 
(c) Financial Difficulty .  
(d) Physical disability . 
(e) Lack of:  
i. capacity to exercise freewill;  
ii. education;  
iii. digital literacy; and  
iv. access to online data security support services.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                     
  
          
105 
  
 
 
      SCHEDULE 7  
GUIDANCE NOTICE  
REGISTRATION OF DATA CONTROLLERS AND DATA PROCESSORS OF MAJOR 
IMPORTANCE AND ALL MATTERS CONNECTED THEREWITH  
NDPC/HQ/GN/VOL.03/B/24  
(Pursuant to Sections 5d, 6(c), 44,  45 and 65 of the Nigeria Data Protection Act, 2003)  
 
WHEREAS,  personal data of citizens and persons (hereafter referred to as data subjects) in Nigeria are 
being processed by various organisations or persons for myriads of reasons within and outside Nigeria;  
AND WHEREAS  it is important for the privacy and security of data subjects to ensure that their personal 
data are processed only by genuine persons or organisations and ONLY for genuine reasons recognised by 
law; 
CONSIDERING  that the Nigeria Data Protection Act, 2023 (hereafter referred to as the Act) under secti on 
5(d) empowers the Nigeria Data Protection Commission (hereafter referred to as the Commission) to 
designate data controllers and data processors of major importance who are to register with the 
Commission;  
NOTING  that section 65 of the Act defines a dat a controller and a data processor of major importance as 
an entity which is domiciled, resident in, or operating in Nigeria and processes or intends to process 
personal data of more than such number of data subjects who are within Nigeria, as the Commissio n may 
prescribe, or such other class of data controller or data processor that is processing personal data of 
particular value or significance to the economy, society or security of Nigeria as the Commission may 
designate;  
FURTHER CONSIDERING the prior not ice and sensitisation programmes in which the Commission 
specifically referred to data controllers  and processors  of major importance under section 5(d)  of the Act as 
the only eligible organisations for registration ; 
THUS , in line with its mandate to, amon g others, designate data controllers and data processors with 
“particular value or significance to the economy, society or security of Nigeria ” the Commission hereby 
issues this Guidance Notice on the Registration of Data Controllers and Processors of Majo r Importance:  
 
1.  Designation of Data Controllers and Data Processors of Major Importance  
(1) A data controller or data processor shall be deemed to have “particular value or significance to the 
economy, society or security of Nigeria ” and hence designated  to be of major importance if it keeps or 
has access to a filing system (whether analogue or digital) for the processing of personal data; and:  
(a) Processes the personal data of more than Two -Hundred  (200) data subjects in six (6) months; or   
(b) Carries out commer cial Information Communication Technology (ICT) services on any digital 
device which has storage capacity for personal data and belongs to another individual; or   
(c) Processes personal data as an organisation or a service provider in anyone of the following sectors:  
i. Aviation;  
ii. Communication;  
                                     
  
          
106 
  
 
iii. Education;  
iv. Electric Power; and  
v. Export and Import;  
vi. Financial;  
vii. Health;  
viii. Hospitality.  
ix. Insurance;  
x. Oil and Gas;  
xi. Tourism;  
xii. E-Commerce  
xiii. Public Service  
(2) This designation does not include the processing of personal data that is specifically excluded by Section 
3 of the NDP Act - such as data processing solely for personal or household purposes.  
 
2. Classification of Data Controllers and Data Proces sors of Major Importance  
(1) The Commission classifies data controllers and data processors into three  (3) levels or categories of 
major data processing, namely:  
(a) Ultra -High (UHL) . 
(b) Extra -High Level (EHL) .  
(c) Ordinary -High  Level (OHL) . 
 
(2)  Ultra -High Level (UHL) shall be a category of data controllers and data processors of major importance 
that are, among other obligations, generally expected to abide by global and highest attainable 
standards  of data protection - taking into account the following factors:  
 
(a) The sensitivity of personal data in their care;  
(b) Data -driven financial assets entrusted in their care by data subjects;  
(c) Reliance on third -party servers or cloud computing services for the pu rpose of substantial 
processing of personal data;  
(d) Substantial involvement in cross -border data flows;  
(e) Processing the personal data of over Five -Thousand  (5,000 ) data subjects through the means of 
technology under its technical control or through a servic e contract;  
(f) The need for international standard certifications for people, processes and technologies involved 
in data confidentiality, integrity and availability; and  
 
Provided always that any four (4) of the foregoing factors in this sub -paragraph 2(2) shall suffice for the 
purposes of categorisation.  
 
(3) Extra -High Level (EHL) shall be a category of data controllers and data processors of major importance that 
are, among other obligations, generally expected to abide by global best practices  of data protection taking 
into account:  
 
(a) The sensitivity of personal data in their care;  
(b) Data -driven financial assets entrusted in their care by data subjects;  
(c) Functions as an establishment of government;  
(d) Reliance on third -party servers or cloud comput ing services for the purpose of substantial 
processing of personal data;                                       
  
          
107 
  
 
(e) Substantial involvement in cross -border data flows;  
(f) Processing the personal data of over One -Thousand  (1,000 ) data subjects through the means of 
technology under their technical cont rol or through a service contract;  
(g) The need for reputable and standardised certifications for people, process and technologies 
involved in data confidentiality, integrity and availability; and  
Provided that any four (4) of the foregoing factors in this su b-paragraph 2(3) shall suffice for the purposes 
of categorisation.  
(4)  Ordinary -High Level (MDP -OHL) shall be a category of data controllers and data processors of major 
importance that are, among other obligations, generally expected to abide by global best practices  of data 
protection taking into account:  
(a) The sensitivity of data assets in their care;  
(b) Inherent vulnerability of data subjects they typically engage with;  
(c) High risk to the privacy of data subjects if such personal data are processed by the data co ntroller or 
data processor in a systematic or automated manner;   
(d) Processing the personal data of over Two-Hundred ( 200) data subjects through the means of 
technology under their technical control or through a service contract;  
(e) The need for adequate techni cal and organisational measures for data protection;  
(f) The need for reputable and standardised certifications for people, processes and technologies 
involved in data confidentiality, integrity and availability; and  
  
 
Provided that any four ( 4) of the foregoing factors in this sub -paragraph 2(4) shall suffice for the purposes of 
categorisation.  
 
3. Specific Types of Data Controllers and Data Processors and their Fees  
(1) The Commission specifies the types of data controllers and data processors of majo r importance under the 
classes referred to in paragraph two (2) of this Guidance Notice as follows:  
(a) Ultra -High  Level (UHL)  – the amount payable is N250,000 . These are:  
i. Commercial banks operating at national or regional level;  
ii. Telecommunication companies;  
iii. Insurance companies;  
iv. Multinational companies;  
v. Electricity distribution companies;  
vi. Oil and Gas companies;  
vii. Public social media App developers and proprietors;  
viii. Public e -mail App developers and proprietors;  
ix. Communication devices manufacturers;  
x. Payment gateway  service providers; and  
xi. Fintechs.  
 
(b) Apart from those mentioned in sub -paragraph 3(1)(a) above, organisations that process personal 
data of over Five -Thousand  (5,000) data subjects in six  (6) months are also in in the category of 
Ultra -High Level (UHL).  
 
 
(c) Extra -High Level (EHL)  – the amount payable is  N100,000 . These are:  
i. Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs) of government;   
 
 
 
                                      
  
          
108 
  
 
ii. Micro Finance Banks;  
iii. Higher Institutions;  
iv. Hospitals providing tertiary or secondary medical services; and  
v. Mortgage Banks.  
 
(d) Apart from those mentioned in sub -paragraph 3(1)(e) above, organisations that process personal data 
of over One-Thousand  (1,000) data subjects but less than Five -Thousand (5,000) within six (6) 
months are also in the category of Major Data Processing -Extra  High Level (MDP -EHL).  
 
(e) Ordinary High Level (OHL)  – the amount payable is  N10,000 . These are:  
i. Primary and Secondary Schools;  
ii. Corporate Training Service Providers;  
iii. Primary Health Centres;  
iv. Independent Medical Laboratories;  
v. Hotels and Guest Houses with less  than fifty (50) suites; and  
vi. Processors who process sensitive personal of more than Two -Hundred  (200)  data 
subjects for commercial purposes.  
 
(f) Apart from those mentioned in sub -paragraph 3(1)(g) above, organisations that process personal 
data of over  Two-Hundred  (200) data subjects but less than One -Thousand (1000 ) within six  (6) 
months are also in the category of Major Data Processing -Ordinary High Level (MDP -OHL).  
 
4. Data Controllers that are Not of Major Importance  
a) Traders or artisans who do not transmit personal data as a trade or business object to other data 
controllers or processors that may process the transmitted personal data for their business goals.  
b) Traders with less than fifteen  (15) employees, or Artisans who do not keep any specific filing 
system of personal data relating to their customers except routine phone contacts files, receipts 
data, contact addresses and electronic mail addresses.  
c) A Community of Friends, Professionals or People of Common Interest who interact on Social 
Media Platforms.  
 
5. Statutory Obligations on Data Controllers and Data Processors of Major Importance  
Section 29(1)(a) of the Act provides that: where a data controller engages the services of 
a data processor, or a data processor engages the services of another data process or, the 
data controller or data processor engaging another shall ensure that the engaged data 
processor complies with the principles and obligations set out in this Act as applicable to 
the data controller.  Accordingly, it is prudent and mandatory for a da ta controller to ensure 
that those they engage as processors comply with the obligations that are applicable to the 
data controller.  
 
6. Exemption of Establishments or Organisations that are Data Controllers and Data Processors 
of Major Importance  
In line wit h section 44(6) of the NDP Act, t he Commission exempts the following categories of 
data controllers of major importance  from registration : 
a) Community -Based Associations;  
b) Faith -Based Organisations;  
c) Foreign Embassies and High Commissions ; 
d) Judicial establishments or bodies carrying out adjudicatory functions ; and  
e) Multigovernmental Organisations .                                      
  
          
109 
  
 
 
7. Data Processing Fees  
(1)  Section 6(b) of the Act provides that the Commission shall have powers to prescribe fees payable 
by data controllers and data processors in accordance with data processing activities. 
Accordingly, a data controller of major importance in the category of MDP -UHL shall on pay Five-
Thousand -naira  (N5, 000 ) as data processing activities fee for each processor it engages for data 
processing activities within a period of twelve ( 12) months.  
(2) Where a data controller transfers the data processing activity of its data processor to another data 
processor it shall not be required to pay data processing fee for the new processor within twelve 
(12) calendar months.  
(3) Where a data controller pays for the renewal of registration of its data processors that are in the 
category of OHL, the data controller shall not  be required to pay data processing fee for the same 
data processor.  
 
Dated this 19th day of December , 2024.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                      
  
          
110 
  
 
 
 
SCHEDULE 8  
LEGITIMATE INTEREST ASSESSMENT TEMPLATE  
This legitimate interest assessment (LIA) template is designed to help you to decide whether or 
not the legitimate interest basis relied upon in Section 25 of the NDP Act is likely to apply to your 
data processing.  
Part 1: Purpose test  
 
You need to assess whether there is a legitimate interest behind the processing.  
 Why do you want to process the data?  
 What benefit do you expect to get from the processing?  
 Do any third parties benefit from the processing?  
 Are there any wider public benefits to the pr ocessing?  
 How important are the benefits that you have identified?  
 What would the impact be if you couldn ’t go ahead with the processing?  
 Are you complying with any specific data protection rules that apply to your processing 
(e.g. profiling requirements )? 
 Are you complying with other relevant laws?  
 Are you complying with industry guidelines or codes of practice?  
 Are there any other ethical issues with the processing?  
 Will the processing involve the personal data of a child in anyway?  
 Do you have an effecti ve means of carrying out age verification ? 
 
  
                                     
  
          
111 
  
 
Part 2: Necessity test  
 
You need to assess whether the processing is necessary for the purpose you have identified.  
 Will this processing actually help you achieve your purpose?  
 Is the processing proportionate to that purpose?  
 Can you achieve the same purpose without the processing?  
 Can you achieve the same purpose by processing less data, or by processing the data in 
another more obvious or less intrusive way?  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                       
  
          
112 
  
 
Part 3: Balancing test  
 
You need to consider the impact on individuals ’ interests and rights and freedoms and assess 
whether this overrides your legitimate interests.  
First, use the DPIA “what to note sections ” in Schedule 4 of the GAID . If you answer yes to 
any of the questions on what to note, then you need to conduct a DPIA instead to assess risks in 
more detail.  
Nature of the Personal Data  
 Is it special category data or criminal offence data?  
 Is it data which people are likely to consider particularly ‘private ’? 
 Are you processing children ’s data or data relating to other vulnerable people?  
 Is the data about people in their personal or professional capacity?  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reasonable expectations  
 Do you have an existing relationship with the individual?  
 What ’s the nature of the relationship and how have you used data in the past?  
 Did you collect the data directly from the individual? What did you tell them at the time?  
 If you obtained the data from a third party, what did they tell the individuals about reuse by 
third parties for other purposes and does this cover you?  
 How long ago did you collect the data? Are there any changes in technology or context 
since then that would affect expectations?  
 Is your intended purpose and method widely understood?  
 Are you intending  to do anything new or innovative?  
 Do you have any evidence about expectations, for example from market research, focus 
groups or other forms of consultation?                                       
  
          
113 
  
 
 Are there any other factors in the particular circumstances that mean they would or would  
not exp ect the processing?  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Likely impact  
 What are the possible impacts of the processing on people?  
 Will individuals lose any control over the use of their personal data?  
 What is the likelihood and severity of any potential impact?  
 Are some people likely to object to the processing or find it intrusive?  
 Would you be happy to explain the processing to individuals?  
 Can you adopt any safeguards to minimise the impact?  
 
                                       
  
          
114 
  
 
Can you offer individuals an opt -out?  
 Yes / No  
 
Making the decision  
 
This is  where you use your answers to Parts 1, 2 and 3 to decide whether or not you can apply 
the legitimate interest basis.  
 
  
Can you rely on legitimate interests for this processing?  
  
Yes / No  
 
Do you have any comments to justify your answer? (optional)  
 
 
 
 
 
LIA completed by   
Date   
 
What is next  
 
a. Keep a record of this LIA, and keep it under review.  
 
b. Do a DPIA if necessary.  
 
c. Include details of your purposes and lawful bas es for processing in your privacy information, 
including an outlin e of your legitimate interests.                                       
  
          
115 
  
 
 
SECTION 37 OF THE 1999 CONSTITUTION OF THE FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF 
NIGERIA  
SCHEDULE 9  
NIGERIA DATA PROTECTION ACT, 2023, GENERAL APPLICATION AND 
IMPLEMENTATI ON DIRECTIVE (NDP ACT - GAID)  
 (ARTICLE 40)  
DATA SUBJECT ’S STANDARD NOTICE TO ADDRESS GRIEVANCE (SNAG)  
 
NAME OF DATA SUBJECT (COMPLAINANT) ---------------------------------------------- ---------------------  
PHONE NUMBER --------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------  
EMAIL ADDRESS -------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------  
OFFICIAL CONTACT ADDRESS (OPTIONAL) --------------------------------------------- ---------------------  
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------  
NAME OF RESPONDENT (Data controller, data processo r or a person) ----------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------  
PHONE NUMBER -------------------------------------------------------------- ------------- ----------------------------  
EMAIL ADDRESS -------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------  
OFFICIAL CONTACT ADDRESS ----------------------------------------------------------- ------------- -----------  
 
NATURE OF VIOLATION (MARK APPROPRIATE BOX) “Personal Data ” means PD.  
Unauthor ised Access to PD        Unauthori sed Use of PD         Loss of Record     Intrusive Use of CCTV  
Inaccurate Personal Data         Identity Theft      Excessive Processing of PD     Lack of Privacy Policy  
Lack of Information /transparency  on PD  Processing         Processing Denial of Access to PD                     
Unsolicited Messages       Breach of Child ’s Privacy       Preselected Cookies Apart fr om Necessary Cookies  
Unlawful Automated Processing of PD       Unauthori sed Disclosure of PD   Others          
Nature of PD  Sensitive  PD    NON -Sensitive PD  
Specify the types of data  
 
Give particulars of violation: When did it happen? Where? Who is involved (if any) How?  
 
 
 
Have you suffered any loss?    Yes     No  
                                     
  
          
116 
  
 
What is the nature of the loss?     Financial       Reputational           Health Related        
Education Related          Job-Related    Property/Valuable   Family Related   Others  
Describe the nature of the loss (if any)  
 
 
State your demand     
 
 
Specify time within which the demand is to be carried out  
 ------------ days. Between ------------------ --------------------- 20------  AND ---------------------------------- 20---- 
 
TAKE NOTICE  that the within named data controller/processor/person is under an obligation to protect the 
privacy rights of data subjects in line with section 37 of the 1999 Constit ution and the Nigeria Data Protection 
Act, 2023. You are to immediately address the complaint herein stated and take a decision on the complaint 
as specified in this complaint or within 30 days – whichever is earlier.  
FURTHER TAKE NOTICE  that the Nigeria Data Protection Commission has been notified of this 
compliant and it is tracked with reference number ------------------------------ . You may be required to give 
account of your data processing activities in accordance with the provisions of the NDP Act. F ailure to act 
on this complaint may result in legal liability for you or your organization.  
Signature -------------- Date ---------------- Name ----------------------------------------  
OFFICIAL  
 STATUS REPORT:      RESOLVED      UNRESOVED     ONGOING  
REMARKS:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                      
  
          
117 
  
 
 
                                                               SCHEDULE 10  
NDP ACT COMPLIANCE AUDIT RETURNS FILING FEE  
SN DCPMI  Tier Fee ( N) 
1. Ultra -High Level – UHL  
 A – 50,000 data 
subjects and above . 1,000,000  
B – 25,000 -49,999 
data subjects . 750,000  
C – below 25,000 data 
subjects . 500,000  
2. Extra -High Level – EHL  
 A – 10,000 data 
subjects and above . 250,000  
B – 5,000 -2,500 data 
subjects . 200,000  
C – below 2,500 data 
subjects . 100,000  
 
 
 
Issued under my  hand this  ------------------- Day of March , 2025  
 
 
 
 
-----------------------------------------------------  
 
DR. VINCENT O. OLATUNJI, CDPO CPP PS, FIIM  
(National Commissioner/CEO)  
 
20th 